Project Gutenberg's Inventions in the Century, by William Henry Doolittle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Inventions in the Century

Author: William Henry Doolittle

Release Date: July 18, 2011 [EBook #36776]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



In an address before the Anthropological Society of Washington in 1885,
the late Prof. F. A. Seely, of the United States Patent Office, set
forth that it was one of the established laws of Invention, that,

"Every human invention has sprung from some prior invention, or from
some prior known expedient."

Inventions, he said, do not, like their protectress, Pallas Athene,
spring forth full grown from the heads of their authors; that both as to
modern inventions and as to those whose history is unrecorded, each
exhibits in itself the evidence of a similar sub-structure; and that,
"in the process of elimination we go back and back and find no resting
place till we reach the rude set of expedients, the original endowment
of men and brutes alike."

Inventions, then, are not creations, but the evolution of man-made
contrivances.

It may be remarked, however, as was once said by William H. Seward: "The
exercise of the inventive faculty is the nearest akin to that of the
Creator of any faculty possessed by the human mind; for while it does
not create in the same sense that the Creator did, yet it is the nearest
approach to it of anything known to man."

There is no history, rock-record, or other evidence of his existence as
man, which discloses a period when he was not an inventor.

Invention is that divine spark which drove, and still drives him to the
production of means to meet his wants, while it illuminates his way.
From that inward spark must have soon followed the invention of that
outer fire to warm and cheer him, and to melt and mould the earth to his
desires. Formed for society, the necessity of communication with his
fellows developed the power of speech. Speech developed written
characters and alphabets. Common communication developed concert of
action, and from concert of action sprung the arts of society.

But the evolution of invention has not been uniform. Long periods of
slowness and stagnation have alternated with shorter or longer periods
of prolific growth, and these with seasons of slumber and repression.

Thus, Prof. Langley has said that man was thousands of years, and
possibly millions, in evolving a cutting edge by rubbing one stone on
another; but only a few thousand years to next develop bronze tools, and
a still shorter period tools of iron.

We cannot say how long the period was from the age of iron tools to the
building of the pyramids, but we know that before those stupendous
structures arose, the six elementary mechanical powers, the lever, the
wheel, the pulley, the inclined plane, the wedge and the screw, were
invented. And without those powers, what mechanical tool or machine has
since been developed? The age of inventions in the times of the ancients
rested mainly upon simple applications of these mechanical powers. The
middle ages slumbered, but on the coming of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, the inventions of the ancients were revived, new ones added,
and their growth and development extended with ever-increasing speed to
the present time.

The inventions of the nineteenth century, wonderful and innumerable as
they are, and marvellous in results produced, are but the fruit of the
seed sown in the past, and the blossom of the buds grown upon the stalks
of former generations. The early crude stone hatchet has become the keen
finished metal implement of to-day, and the latter involves in itself
the culmination of a long series of processes for converting the rough
ore into the hard and glistening steel.

The crooked and pointed stick with which the Egyptian turned the sands
of the Nile has slowly grown to be the finished plough that is now
driven through the sod by steam.

The steam-operated toys of Hero of Alexandria were revived in principle
and incorporated in the engines of Papin and the Marquis of Worcester in
the seventeenth century; and the better engines of Savery, Newcomen, and
more especially of James Watt in the eighteenth century, left the
improvements in steam-engines of the nineteenth century--great as they
are--inventions only in matter of detail.

It has been said that electrical science began with the labours of Dr.
Gilbert, published in 1600. These, with the electrical discoveries and
inventions of Gray, Franklin, Galvani, and others in the next century,
terminating with the invention of his battery by Volta in 1800,
constituted the framework on which was built that world of flashing
light and earth-circling messages in which we now live.

The study of inventions in any one or all eras cannot proceed
intelligently unless account is taken not only of their mode of
construction, and of their evolution one from another, but of the
evolution of distinct arts, their relation, their interdependence in
growth, and their mutual progress.

The principles adopted by the ancients in weaving and spinning by hand
are those still in force; but so great was the advance of inventions
from hand-operated mechanisms to machines in these and other arts, and
especially in steam, in the last half of the eighteenth century, that it
has been claimed that the age of machine production or invention then
for the first time really began.

When the humble lift became the completed elevator of to-day, the
"sky-scraper" buildings appeared; but these buildings waited upon the
invention of their steel skeletons, and the steel was the child of the
Bessemer process.

The harp with which David stirred the dead soul of Saul was the
prototype of the sweet clavichord, the romantic virginal, the tinkling
harpsichord, and the grand piano. The thrumming of the chords by the
fingers was succeeded by the striking keys; and the more perfect
rendition of tones awaited the application of new discoveries in the
realm of musical sounds. The keys and the levers in the art of musical
instruments were transferred to the art of printing, and are found
to-day striking a more homely music on the type-writer and on those
other and more wonderful printing instruments that mould, and set, and
distribute the type. But these results of later days did not reach their
perfected operations and forms until many other arts had been discovered
and developed, by which to treat and improve the wood, and the wire, and
all the other materials of which those early instruments were composed,
and by which the underlying principles of their operations became known.

Admitting that man possesses the faculty of invention, what are the
motives that induce its exercise? Why so prolific in inventions now? And
will they continue to increase in number and importance, or decrease?

An interesting treatise of bulky dimensions might be written in answer
to these queries, and the answers might not then be wholly satisfactory.
Space permits the submission of but a few observations and suggestions
on these points:----

_Necessity_ is still the mother of inventions, but not of all of them.
The pressing needs of man in fighting nakedness and hunger, wild beasts
and storms, may have driven him to the production of most of his early
contrivances; but as time went on and his wants of every kind
multiplied, other factors than mere necessity entered into the problem,
and now it is required to account for the multiplicity of inventions
under the general head of _Wants_.

To-day it is the want of the luxuries, as well as of the necessities of
life, the want of riches, distinction, power, and place, the wants of
philanthropy and the wants of selfishness, and that restless, inherent,
unsatisfied, indescribable want which is ever pushing man onward on the
road of progress, that must be regarded as the springs of invention.

_Accident_ is thought to be the fruitful source of great inventions. It
is a factor that cannot be ignored. But accidents are only occasional
helps, rarely occurring,--flashes of light suddenly revealing the end of
the path along which the inventor has been painfully toiling, and
unnoticed except by him alone. They are sudden discoveries which for the
most part simply shorten his journey. The rare complete contrivance
revealed by accident is not an invention at all, but a discovery.

The greatest incentive in modern times to the production of inventions
is governmental protection.

When governments began to recognize the right of property in inventions,
and to devise and enforce means by which their author should hold and
enjoy the same, as he holds his land, his house, or his horse, then
inventions sprung forth as from a great unsealed fountain.

This principle first found recognition in England in 1623, when
parliament, stung by the abuse of the royal prerogative in the grant of
exclusive personal privileges that served to crush the growth of
inventions and not to multiply them, by its celebrated Statute of
Monopolies, abolished all such privileges, but excepted from its
provisions the grant of patents "for the sole working or making of any
manner of new manufactures within this realm to the true and first
inventor" thereof.

This statute had little force, however, in encouraging and protecting
inventors until the next century, and until after the great inventions
of Arkwright in spinning and James Watt in steam-engines had been
invaded, and the attention of the courts called more seriously thereby
to the property rights of inventors, and to the necessity of a liberal
exposition of the law and its proper enforcement.

Then followed in 1789 the incorporation of that famous provision in the
Constitution of the United States, declaring that Congress shall have
the power "To promote the progress of science and useful arts by
securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right
to their respective writings and discoveries."

In 1791 followed the law of the National Assembly of France for the
protection of new inventions, setting forth in the preamble, among other
things, "that not to regard an industrial invention as the property of
its author would be to attack the essential rights of man."

These fundamental principles have since been adopted and incorporated in
their laws by all the nations of the earth.

Inventions in their nature being for the good of all men and for all
time, it has been deemed wise by all nations in their legislation not to
permit the inventor to lock up his property in secret, or confine it to
his own use; and hence the universal practice is to enact laws giving
him, his heirs, and assigns, exclusive ownership to this species of his
property for a limited time only, adjudged sufficient to reward him for
his efforts in its production, and to encourage others in like
productions; while he, in consideration for this protection, is to fully
make known his invention, so that the public may be enabled to freely
make and use it after its exclusive ownership shall have expired.

In addition to the motives and incentives mentioned inducing this modern
mighty outflow of inventions, regard must be had to the conditions of
personal, political and intellectual freedom, and of education. There is
no class of inventors where the mass of men are slaves; and when dense
ignorance abounds, invention sleeps.

In the days of the greatest intellectual freedom of Greece, Archimedes,
Euclid, and Hero, its great inventors, flourished; but when its
political _status_ had reduced the mass of citizens to slaves, when the
work of the artisan and the inventor was not appreciated beyond the gift
of an occasional crown of laurel, when manual labour and the labourer
were scorned, inventions were not born, or, if born, found no
nourishment to prolong their lives.

In Rome, the labourer found little respect beyond the beasts of burden
whose burdens he shared, and the inventor found no provision of
fostering care or protection in her mighty jurisprudence. The middle
ages carefully repressed the minds of men, and hid away in dark recesses
the instruments of learning. When men at length awoke to claim their
birthright of freedom, they invented the printing-press and rediscovered
gunpowder, with which to destroy the tyranny of both priests and kings.
Then arose the modern inventor, and with him came the freedom and the
arts of civilisation which we now enjoy.

What the exercise of free and protected invention has brought to this
century is thus summarised by Macaulay:

"It has lengthened life; it has mitigated pain; has extinguished
diseases; has increased the fertility of the soil; given new security to
the mariner; furnished new arms to the warrior; spanned great rivers and
estuaries with bridges of form unknown to our fathers; it has guided the
thunderbolt innocuously from heaven to earth; it has lighted up the
night with splendour of the day; it has extended the range of human
vision; it has multiplied the power of the human muscles; it has
accelerated motion; it has annihilated distance; it has facilitated
intercourse, correspondence, all friendly offices, all despatch of
business; it has enabled man to descend to the depths of the sea, to
soar into the air, to penetrate securely into the noxious recesses of
the earth; to traverse the land in carts which whirl along without
horses; to cross the ocean in ships which run many knots an hour against
the wind. Those are but a part of its fruits, and of its first fruits,
for it is a philosophy which never rests, which is never perfect. Its
law is progress. A point which yesterday was invisible is its goal
to-day, and will be its starting point to-morrow."

The onward flow of inventions may be interrupted, if not materially
stayed, by the cessation of some of the causes and incentives which now
give them life. When comfort for all and rest for all, and a suitable
division of labour, and an equal distribution of its fruits are reached,
in that state of society which is pictured in the visions of the social
philosopher, or as fast as such conditions are reached, so soon will
cease the pricking of those spurs of invention,--individual rewards, the
glorious strife of competition, the harrowing necessities, and the
ambitions for place and power. If all are to co-operate and share alike,
what need of exclusive protection and fierce and individual struggle?
Why not sit down now and break the loaf and share it, and pour the wine,
and enjoy things as they are, without a thought for the morrow?

The same results as to inventions may be reached in different but less
pleasant ways: When all the industries are absorbed by huge combinations
of capital the strife of competition among individuals, and the making
of individual inventions to meet such competition, will greatly
disappear. Or, the same results may be effected by stringent laws of
labour organisations, in restricting or repressing all individual
independent effort, prescribing what shall be done or what shall not be
done along certain lines of manufacture or employment. So that the
progress of future inventions depends on the outcome of the great
economic, industrial, and social battles which are now looming on the
pathway of the future.

But what the inventions of the nineteenth century were and what they
have done for Humanity, is a chapter that must be read by all those now
living or to come who wish to learn the history of their race. It is a
story which gathers up all the threads of previous centuries and weaves
them into a fabric which must be used in all the coming ages in the
attainment of their comforts, their adornments, and their civilisations.

To enumerate all the inventions of the century would be like calling up
a vast army of men and proclaiming the name of each. The best that can
be done is to divide the wide field into chapters, and in these chapters
give as best one may an idea of the leading inventions that have
produced the greatest industries of the World.




CHAPTER II.

AGRICULTURE AND ITS IMPLEMENTS.


The Egyptians were the earliest and greatest agriculturists, and from
them the art was learned by the Greeks. Greece in the days of her glory
greatly improved the art, and some of her ablest men wrote valuable
treatises on its different topics. Its farmers thoroughly ploughed and
fertilised the soil, used various implements for its cultivation, paid
great attention to the raising of fruits,--the apple, pear, cherry,
plum, quince, peach, lemon, fig and many other varieties suitable to
their climate, and improved the breeds of cattle, horse and sheep. When,
however, social pride and luxurious city life became the dominant
passions, agriculture was left to menials, and the art gradually faded
with the State. Rome in her best days placed farming in high regard. Her
best writers wrote voluminously on agricultural subjects, a tract of
land was allotted to every citizen, which was carefully cultivated, and
these citizen farmers were her worthiest and most honoured sons. The
condition and needs of the soil were studied, its strength replenished
by careful fertilisation, and it was worked with care. There were
ploughs which were made heavy or light as the different soils required,
and there were a variety of farm implements, such as spades, hoes,
harrows and rakes. Grains, such as wheat, barley, rye and oats, were
raised, a variety of fruits and vegetables, and great attention paid to
the breeding of stock. Cato and Varro, Virgil and Columella, Pliny and
Palladius delighted to instruct the farmer and praise his occupation.

But as the Roman Empire grew, its armies absorbed its intelligent
farmers, the tilling of the soil was left to the menial and the slave,
and the Empire and agriculture declined together.

Then came the hordes of northern barbarians pouring in waves over the
southern countries and burying from sight their arts and civilisation.
The gloom of the middle ages then closed down upon the European world.
Whatever good may have been accomplished in other directions by the
crusades, agriculture reached its lowest ebb, save in those instances
where the culture of the soil received attention from monastic
institutions.

The sixteenth century has been fixed upon as the time when Europe awoke
from its long slumber. Then it was after the invention of the printing
press had become well established that publications on agriculture began
to appear. The _Boke of Husbandrie_, in 1523, by Sir Anthony
Fitzherbert; Thomas Tusser's _Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry_;
Barnaby Googe's _The Whole Art of Husbandry_; _The Jewel House of Art
and Nature_, by Sir Hugh Platt; the _English Improver_ of Walter Blithe,
and the writings of Sir Richard Weston on the husbandry of Brabant and
Flanders, were the principal torches by which the light on this subject
was handed down through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Further
awakening was had in the eighteenth century, the chief part of which was
given by Jethro Tull, an English agriculturist, who lived, and wrote,
and laboured in the cause between 1680 and 1740. Tull's leading idea was
the thorough pulverisation of the soil, his doctrines being that plants
derived their nourishment from minute particles of soil, hence the need
of its pulverisation. He invented and introduced a horse hoe, a grain
drill, and a threshing machine.

Next appeared Arthur Young, of England, born in 1741, whose life was
extended into the 19th century, and to whom the world was greatly
indebted for the spread of agricultural knowledge. He devoted frequent
and long journeys to obtaining information on agricultural subjects, and
his writings attracted the attention and assistance of the learned
everywhere. His chief work was the making known widely of the beneficial
effects of ammonia and ammoniacal compounds on vegetation. Many other
useful branches of the subject, clearly treated by him, are found in his
_Annals of Agriculture_. It was this same Arthur Young with whom
Washington corresponded from his quiet retreat at Mount Vernon. After
the close of the War of Independence in 1783 and before the adoption of
the Constitution in 1789 and his elevation to the Presidency in that
year, Washington devoted very much of his time to the cultivation of his
large estate in Virginia. He took great interest in every improvement in
agriculture and its implements. He invented a plough and a rotary seed
drill, improved his harrows and mills, and made many inquiries relative
to the efficacy of ploughs and threshing machines made in England and
other parts of Europe. It was during this period that he opened an
interesting correspondence with Young on improvements in agriculture,
which was carried on even while he was President, and he availed himself
of the proffer of Young's services to fill an order for seeds and two
ploughs from a London merchant. He also wrote to Robert Cary & Co.,
merchants in London, concerning an engine he had heard of as being
constructed in Switzerland, for pulling up trees and their stumps by the
roots, and ordered one to be sent him if the machine were efficient.

Jefferson, Washington's great contemporaneous statesman and Virginia
planter, and to whom has been ascribed the chief glory of the American
patent system, himself also an inventor, enriched his country by the
full scientific knowledge he had gained from all Europe of agricultural
pursuits and improvements.

The progress of the art, in a fundamental sense, that is in a knowledge
of the constituents, properties, and needs of the soil, commenced with
the investigations of Sir Humphry Davy at the close of the 18th century,
resulting in his celebrated lectures before the Board of Agriculture
from 1802 to 1812, and his practical experiments in the growth of plants
and the nature of fertilisers. Agricultural societies and boards were a
characteristic product of the eighteenth century in Europe and America.
But this birth, or revival of agricultural studies, the enthusiastic
interest taken therein by its great and learned men, and all its
valuable publications and discoveries, bore comparatively little fruit
in that century. The ignorance and prejudice of the great mass of
farmers led to a determined, and in many instances violent resistance to
the introduction of labour-saving machinery and the practical
application of what they called "book-farming." A fear of driving people
out of employment led them to make war upon new agricultural machines
and their inventors, as they had upon weaving and spinning inventions.
This war was more marked in England than elsewhere, because there more
of the new machines were first introduced, and the number of labourers
in those fields was the greatest. In America the ignorance took the
milder shape of contempt and prejudice. Farmers refused, for instance,
to use cast-iron ploughs as it was feared they would poison the soil.

