The Project Gutenberg EBook of Searchlights on Health: Light on Dark
Corners, by B.G. Jefferis and J. L. Nichols

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Searchlights on Health: Light on Dark Corners
       A Complete Sexual Science and a Guide to Purity and Physical
       Manhood, Advice To Maiden, Wife, And Mother, Love,
       Courtship, And Marriage

Author: B.G. Jefferis
        J. L. Nichols

Release Date: November 24, 2007 [EBook #23609]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



1. LOVE.--There is no greater or more profound reality than love. Why that
reality should be obscured by mere sentimentalism, with all its train of
absurdities is incomprehensible. There is no nobler possession than the
love of another. There is no higher gift from one human being to another
than love. The gift and the possession are true sanctifiers of life, and
should be worn as precious jewels without affectation and without
bashfulness. For this reason there is nothing to be ashamed of in a love
letter, provided it be sincere.

2. FORFEITS.--No man need consider that he forfeits dignity if he speaks
with his whole heart: no woman need fear she forfeits her womanly
attributes if she responds as her heart bids her respond. "Perfect love
casteth out fear" is as true now as when the maxim was first given to the
world.

3. TELLING THEIR LOVE.--The generality of the sex is love to be loved: how
are they to know the fact that they {38} are loved unless they are told? To
write a sensible love letter requires more talent than to solve, with your
pen, a profound problem in philosophy. Lovers must not then expect much
from each other's epistles.

4. CONFIDENTIAL.--Ladies and gentlemen who correspond with each other
should never be guilty of exposing any of the contents of any letters
written expressing confidence, attachment or love. The man who confides in
a lady and honors her with his confidence should be treated with perfect
security and respect, and those who delight in showing their confidential
letters to others are unworthy, heartless and unsafe companions.

5. RETURN OF LETTERS.--If letters were written under circumstances which no
longer exist and all confidential relations are at an end, then all letters
should be promptly returned.

6. HOW TO BEGIN A LOVE LETTER.--How to begin a love letter has been no
doubt the problem of lovers and suitors of all ages and nations. Fancy the
youth of Young America with lifted pen, thinking how he shall address his
beloved. Much depends upon this letter. What shall he say, and how shall he
say it, is the great question. Perseverance, however, will solve the
problem and determine results.

7. FORMS OF BEGINNING A LOVE LETTER.--Never say, "My Dearest Nellie," "My
Adored Nellie," or "My Darling Nellie," until Nellie has first called you
"My Dear," or has given you to understand that such familiar terms are
permissible. As a rule a gentleman will never err if he says "Dear Miss
Nellie," and if the letters are cordially reciprocated the "Miss" may in
time be omitted, or other familiar terms used instead. In addressing a
widow "Dear Madam," or, "My Dear Madam," will be a proper form until
sufficient intimacy will justify the use of other terms.

8. RESPECT.--A lady must always be treated with respectful delicacy, and a
gentleman should never use the term "Dear" or "My Dear" under any
circumstances unless he knows it is perfectly acceptable or a long and
friendly acquaintance justifies it.

9. HOW TO FINISH A LETTER.--A letter will be suggested by the remarks on
how to begin one. "Yours respectfully," "Yours truly," "Yours sincerely,"
"Yours affectionately," "Yours ever affectionately," "Yours most
affectionately," "Ever yours," "Ever your own," or "Yours," are all
appropriate, each depending upon the beginning of the letter. It is
difficult to see any phrase which could be added to them which would carry
more meaning than they {39} contain. People can sign themselves "adorers"
and such like, but they do so at the peril of good taste. It is not good
that men or women "worship" each other--if they succeed in preserving
reciprocal love and esteem they will have cause for great contentment.

10. PERMISSION.--No young man should ever write to a young lady any letter,
formal or informal, unless he has first sought her permission to do so.

11. SPECIAL FORMS.--We give various forms or models of love letters to be
_studied, not copied_. We have given no replies to the forms given, as
every letter written will naturally suggest an answer. A careful study will
be a great help to many who have not enjoyed the advantages of a literary
education.

[Illustration]

_FORMS OF SOCIAL LETTERS._

       *       *       *       *       *

_1.--From a Young Lady to a Clergyman Asking a Recommendation._

Nantwich, May 18th, 1894.

Reverend and Dear Sir:

Having seen an advertisment for a school mistress in the Daily Times, I
have been recommended to offer myself as a candidate. Will you kindly favor
me {40} with a testimonial as to my character, ability and conduct while at
Boston Normal School? Should you consider that I am fitted for the
position, you would confer a great favor on me if you would interest
yourself in my behalf.

              I remain, Reverend Sir,
          Your most obedient and humble servant,
                  LAURA B. NICHOLS.

_2.--Applying for a Position as a Teacher of Music._

Scotland, Conn., January 21st, 1894.

Madam:

Seeing your advertisement in The Clarion of to-day, I write to offer my
services as a teacher of music in your family.

I am a graduate of the Peabody Institute, of Baltimore, where I was
thoroughly instructed in instrumental and vocal music.

I refer by permission to Mrs. A. J. Davis, 1922 Walnut Street; Mrs.
Franklin Hill, 2021 Spring Garden Street, and Mrs. William Murray, 1819
Spruce Street, in whose families I have given lessons.

Hoping that you may see fit to employ me, I am,

          Very respectfully yours,
                  NELLIE REYNOLDS.

_3.--Applying for a Situation as a Cook._

Charlton Place, September 8th, 1894.

Madam:

Having seen your advertisement for a cook in today's Times, I beg to offer
myself for your place. I am a thorough cook. I can make clear soups,
entrees, jellies, and all kinds of made dishes. I can bake, and am also
used to a dairy. My wages are $4 per week, and I can give good reference
from my last place, in which I lived for two years. I am thirty-three years
of age.

          I remain, Madam,
              Yours very respectfully,
                  MARY MOONEY.

_4.--Recommending a School Teacher._

Ottawa, Ill., February 10th, 1894.

Col. Geo. H. Haight,
President Board of Trustees, etc.

Dear Sir: I take pleasure in recommending to your favorable consideration
the application of Miss Hannah Alexander for the position of teacher in the
public school at Weymouth. {41}

Miss Alexander is a graduate of the Davidson Seminary, and for the past
year has taught a school in this place. My children have been among her
pupils, and their progress has been entirely satisfactory to me.

Miss Alexander is a strict disciplinarian, an excellent teacher, and is
thoroughly competent to conduct the school for which she applies.

Trusting that you may see fit to bestow upon her the appointment she seeks,
I am,

          Yours very respectfully,
                  ALICE MILLER.

_5.--A Business Introduction._

Chicago., Ill., May 1st, 1894.

J. W. Brown,
Earlville, Ill.

My Dear Sir: This will introduce to you Mr. William Channing, of this city,
who visits Earlville on a matter of business, which he will explain to you
in person. You can rely upon his statements, as he is a gentleman of high
character, and should you be able to render him any assistance, it would be
greatly appreciated by

          Yours truly,
                  HAIGHT LARABEE.

_6.--Introducing One Lady to Another._

Dundee, Tenn., May 5th, 1894.

Dear Mary:

Allow me to introduce to you my ever dear friend, Miss Nellie Reynolds, the
bearer of this letter. You have heard me speak of her so often that you
will know at once who she is. As I am sure you will be mutually pleased
with each other, I have asked her to inform you of her presence in your
city. Any attention you may show her will be highly appreciated by

          Yours affectionately,
                  LIZZIE EICHER.

_7.--To a Lady, Apologizing for a Broken Engagement._

Albany, N. Y., May 10th, 1894.

My Dear Miss Lee:

Permit me to explain my failure to keep my appointment with you this
evening. I was on my way to your house, with the assurance of a pleasant
evening, when unfortunately I was very unexpectedly called from home on
very important business.

I regret my disappointment, but hope that the future may afford us many
pleasant meetings.

          Sincerely your friend,
                  IRVING GOODRICH.

{42}

_8.--Form of an Excuse for a Pupil._

Thursday Morning, April 4th.

Mr. Bunnel:

You will please excuse William for non-attendance at school yesterday, as I
was compelled to keep him at home to attend to a matter of business.

                  MRS. A. SMITH.

_9.--Form of Letter Accompanying a Present._

Louisville, July 6, 1894.

My Dearest Nelly:

Many happy returns of the day. So fearful was I that it would escape your
memory, that I thought I would send you this little trinket by way of
reminder. I beg you to accept it and wear it for the sake of the giver.
With love and best wishes.

          Believe me ever, your sincere friend,
                  CAROLINE COLLINS.

_10.--Returning Thanks for the Present._

Louisville, July 6, 1894.

Dear Mrs. Collins:

I am very much obliged to you for the handsome bracelet you have sent me.
How kind and thoughtful it was of you to remember me on my birthday. I am
sure I have every cause to bless the day, and did I forget it, I have many
kind friends to remind me of it. Again thanking you for your present, which
is far too beautiful for me, and also for your kind wishes.

          Believe me, your most grateful
                  BERTHA SMITH.

_11.--Congratulating a Friend Upon His Marriage._

Menton, N.Y., May 24th, 1894.

My Dear Everett:

I have to-day received the invitation to your wedding, and as I cannot be
present at that happy event to offer my congratulations in person, I write.

I am heartily glad you are going to be married, and congratulate you upon
the wisdom of your choice. You have won a noble as well as a beautiful
woman, and one whose love will make you a happy man to your life's end. May
God grant that trouble may not come near you, but should it be your lot,
you will have a wife to whom you can look with confidence for comfort, and
whose good sense and devotion to you will be your sure and unfailing
support.

That you may both be very happy, and that your happiness may increase with
your years, is the prayer of

          Your Friend,
                  FRANK HOWARD.

{43}

[Illustration: Declaration of Affection]

Any extravagant flattery should be avoided, both as tending to disgust
those to whom it is addressed, as well as to degrade the writers, and to
create suspicion as to their sincerity. The sentiments should spring from
the tenderness of the heart, and, when faithfully and delicately expressed,
will never be read without exciting sympathy or emotion in all hearts not
absolutely deadened by insensibility.

{44}

[Illustration]

_FORMS OF LOVE LETTERS._

_12.--An Ardent Declaration._.

Naperville, Ill., June 10th, 1894.

My Dearest Laura:

I can no longer restrain myself from writing to you, dearest and best of
girls, what I have often been on the point of saying to you. I love you so
much that I cannot find words in which to express my feelings. I have loved
you from the very first day we met, and always shall. Do you blame me
because I write so freely? I should be unworthy of you if I did not tell
you the whole truth. Oh, Laura, can you love me in return? I am sure I
shall not be able to bear it if your answer is unfavorable. I will study
your every wish if you will give me the right to do so. May I hope? Send
just one kind word to your sincere friend,

              HARRY SMITH.

_13.--A Lover's Good-bye Before Starting on a Journey._

Pearl St., New York, March 11th, 1894.

My Dearest Nellie: I am off to-morrow, and yet not altogether, for I leave
my heart behind in your gentle keeping. You need not place a guard over it,
however, for it is as impossible that it should stay away, as for a bit of
steel {45} to rush from a magnet. The simile is eminently correct, for you,
my dear girl, are a magnet, and my heart is as true to you as steel. I
shall make my absence as brief as possible. Not a day, not an hour, not a
minute, shall I waste either in going or returning. Oh, this business; but
I won't complain, for we must have something for our hive besides
honey--something that rhymes with it--and that we must have it, I must
bestir myself. You will find me a faithful correspondent. Like the spider,
I shall drop a line by (almost) every post; and mind, you must give me
letter for letter. I can't give you credit. Your returns must be prompt and
punctual.

