Project Gutenberg's The Tragedies of the Medici, by Edgcumbe Staley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Tragedies of the Medici

Author: Edgcumbe Staley

Release Date: January 30, 2004 [EBook #10877]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


When Alexandre Dumas wrote his _Crimes of the Borgias_--and other
"Crimes"--he fully intended to compile a companion volume, treating of
episodes in the great family of the Medici. With this project in view,
he collected much material, and actually published, tentatively, two
interesting brochures: _Une Année à Florence_--in 1841, and _Les
Galeries de Florence_--in 1842.

Nothing, however, came of his more ambitious "idea," and, until to-day,
no one has taken in hand to write _The Tragedies of the Medici_. My
attention was first directed to the omission during the preparation of
my _Guilds of Florence_, published in 1906; and I determined to address
myself to the forging of that lurid link in the catena of Florentine
romance.

In the following pages my readers will see that I have entirely departed
from the conventional conceits of the ordinary historian. I have sought
to set out the whole truth--not a garbled version--whilst I have
fearlessly added decorative features where facts were absent or were
too prosaic.

The short "Introduction," dealing with the rise and progress of the
house of Medici, will be useful to my public, and the "Chart of the
Tragedies" will assist students and others in their appreciation of my
enterprise--it is my own compilation and as complete as possible.

The "Bibliography" will help serious readers to a wider reading of my
authorities, and the Illustrations--the best procurable--will fix in all
my readers' minds something of the actual personalities of my "Tyrants"
and my "Victims."

EDGCUMBE STALEY.



CONTENTS


PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I

_The Pazzi Conspiracy_--Lorenzo, "_Il Magnifico_"--Giuliano, "_Il
Pensieroso_".

CHAPTER II

_The First Tyrannicide_--Ippolito, "_Il Cardinale_"--Alessandro, "_Il
Negro_"--Lorenzino, "_Il Terribile_".

CHAPTER III

_A Father's Vengeance_--Maria, Giovanni, and Garzia de'
Medici--Malatesta de' Malatesti.

CHAPTER IV

_Three Murdered Princesses_--Lucrezia, Duchess of Ferrara and Creole de'
Contrari--Eleanora Garzia, wife of Piero de Medici, Alessandro Gaci, and
Bernardino degl' Antinori--Isabella, Duchess of Bracciano--Troilo
d'Orsini and Lelio Torello.

CHAPTER V

_True and False Lovers_--Francesco, "_Il Virtuoso_"--Bianca Cappello,
"_La Figlia di Venezia_"--Pietro Buonaventuri--Cassandra de'
Borghiani--Pellegrina Buonaventuri, wife of Ulisse Bentivoglio--Antonio
Riario.

CHAPTER VI

_Pathetic Victims of Fateful Passion_--Eleanora degli Albizzi and Sforza
Almeni--Cammilla de' Martelli--Virginia de' Medici e d'Este--Cardinal
Ferdinando de' Medici.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX

CHART OF THE TRAGEDIES




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Bianca Cappello-Buonaventuri
Giovanni d'Averardo de' Medici
"Journey of the Magi" (Medici)
"Adoration of the Magi" (Medici)
Lucrezia de' Medici
Lorenzo Il Magnifico
Giuliano Il Pensieroso
Ippolito--Cardinal
Alessandro--First Duke of Florence
Giovanni--"Delle Bande Nere"
Eleanora de' Medici
Maria Lucrezia de' Medici
Giovanni--Cardinal
Garzia de' Medici
Lucrezia--Duchess of Ferrara
Eleanora--Wife of Piero de' Medici
Piero de' Medici
Isabella--Duchess of Bracciano
Francesco--Grand Duke of Tuscany
Giovanna de' Medici
Don Antonio "de' Medici"
Pellegrina Buonaventuri-Bentivoglio
Cosimo I--"Tyrant of Tyrants"
Cammilla de' Medici
Ferdinando de' Medici--Cardinal




INTRODUCTION


The origin of the Medici family is lost in the mists of the Middle Ages,
and, only here and there, can the historian gain glimpses of the lives
of early forbears. Still, there is sufficient data, to be had for the
digging, upon which to transcribe, inferentially at least, an
interesting narrative.

Away towards the end of the twelfth century,--exact dates are wholly
beside the mark--there dwelt, under the shadow of one of the rugged
castles of the robber-captains of the Mugello in Tuscany, a hard-working
and trustworthy bonds-man--one Chiarissimo--"Old Honesty," as we may
call him. He was married to an excellent helpmeet, and was by his lord
permitted to till a small piece of land and rear his family.

In addition to intelligence in agriculture, it would seem that he, or
perhaps his wife, possessed some knowledge of the virtues of roots and
herbs, for, in one corner of his _podere_, he had a garden of "simples."
The few peaceable inhabitants of that warlike valley, and also many a
wounded man-at-arms, sought "Old Honesty" and his wise mate for what we
now call "kitchen remedies."

Those, indeed, were happy days with respect to suffering human nature.
"Kill or Cure" might have been the character of the healing art, but
certainly specialists had not invented our appendicitis and other
fashionable twentieth-century physical fashions! A little medical
knowledge sufficed, and decoctions, pillules, poultices, and bleedings
made up the simple pharmacopoeia.

All the same, the satirical rhyme, which an old chronicler put into the
mouths of many a despairing patient, in later days, may have been true
also of "Old Honesty" and his nostrums:

"There's not a herb nor a root
Nor any remedy to boot
Which can stave death off by a foot!"

Of that good couple's family only one name has been
preserved--Gianbuono, "Good John." Passerini says he was a
priest--probably he means a hermit. Anyhow, he acquired more property in
the Valle della Sieve and founded a church--Santa Maria dell'
Assunta--possibly the enlargement of his cell--upon Monte Senario,
between the valley of the Arno and that of the Sieve.

Ser Gianbuono--ecclesiastic or not--had two sons--Bonagiunto, "Lucky
Lad," and Chiarissimo II. In those primitive times nobody troubled about
surnames--idiosyncrasy of any kind was a sufficient indication of
individuality. The brothers were enterprising fellows, and both made
tracks for Florence, which--risen Phoenix-like from barbarian ashes--was
thriving marvellously as a mart for art and craft.

