The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Letters of Amerigo Vespucci, by 
Amerigo Vespucci and Bartolom de las Casas and Christopher Columbus

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Letters of Amerigo Vespucci
       and other documents illustrative of his career

Author: Amerigo Vespucci
        Bartolom de las Casas
        Christopher Columbus

Translator: Clements R. Markham

Release Date: August 3, 2011 [EBook #36924]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1




Amerigo Vespucci embraced a mercantile life at Florence,[6] and was
eventually taken into the great commercial house of the Medici, the head
of which was Lorenzo Piero Francesco di Medici, who succeeded his father,
Lorenzo the Magnificent, in 1492. The house had transactions in Spain,
and required experienced agents at Cadiz. Amerigo, who was then over
forty years of age, and Donato Niccolini were selected for this duty,
and took up their residence at Cadiz and Seville in 1492. In December
1495, an Italian merchant, named Juanoto Berardi, died at Seville, and
Vespucci was employed to wind up his affairs. This Berardi had contracted,
on April 9th, 1495, to supply the Government with twelve vessels of 900
tons each for the Indies.[7] He handed over the first four in the same
April, four more in June, and the rest in September, but unluckily the
four last were wrecked before delivery.[8] On the 10th of April 1495,
the Spanish Government broke faith with Columbus, and contrary to the
concession made to him, free navigation was allowed to the Indies,
on condition that the ships sailed from Cadiz, and were registered
as submitting to certain engagements as regards the State. Gomara,
an unreliable authority, alleges that many vessels took advantage of
this concession. It is likely enough that some were sent on commercial
ventures, but it is grossly improbable that any discoveries of importance
were made and left entirely unrecorded. The Admiral remonstrated against
the infraction of his rights, and the order of April 10th, 1495, was
cancelled on June 2nd, 1497.

During this period Vespucci was engaged at Cadiz as a provision
contractor. A record is preserved of his having received 10,000 maravedis
from Treasurer Pinelo on January 12th, 1496, for payment of sailors'
wages; and we learn from Muñoz that other entries[9] prove that Vespucci
continued his business of provision merchant at least until May 1498. He
contracted for one, if not for two, of the expeditions of Columbus. A
very civil and plausible man was this beef contractor, and the Admiral
spoke of him, seven years afterwards, as being very respectable (_hombre
muy de bien_).

In 1499, the very respectable contractor, who was approaching the age of
fifty, determined to retire from business and go to sea. His own reasons
for this complete change in his old age were that he had already seen
and known various changes of fortune in business; that a man might at
one time be at the top of the well and at another be fallen and subject
to losses; and that it had become evident to him that a merchant's life
was one of continual labour, with the chance of failure and ruin. It
was rather late in life to make these discoveries, and it may fairly
be suspected that there was some more concrete reason for his change of
life which he concealed under these generalities.

The expedition in which Vespucci sailed was organised and fitted out
by Alonzo de Hojeda in 1499. Columbus, having discovered the island
of Trinidad and the mainland of South America on the 31st of July
1498, arrived at San Domingo in the end of August. In October he sent
five ships to Spain with the news of the discovery, a chart of the
new coast-line and islands, and a report containing mention of the
existence of pearls. These precious documents fell into the hands of
Bishop Fonseca, who showed them to Hojeda, a man whom he favoured. The
Bishop suggested that his _protégé_ should equip an expedition to reap
all the advantages to be derived from the discoveries of the Admiral,
and granted him a licence. Hojeda was nothing loth, but he was in want of
funds, and only succeeded in fitting out four vessels by promising shares
of the expected profits to persons in Seville and Cadiz who would advance
money. Vespucci seems to have been one of these promoters of Hojeda's
voyage. Las Casas supposes that he was taken on board as a merchant who
had contributed to the expenses, and also possibly on account of his
theoretical knowledge of cosmography, of which he doubtless made the most.

As there is no doubt that Vespucci wrote the famous letters from Lisbon,
we may gather some idea of the man from their contents. He was fond
of airing his classical knowledge, though it was a mere smattering;
for he thought that Pliny was the contemporary of Mecænas,[10] and
that the sculptor Policletus was a painter.[11] On the other hand he
quotes Petrarch, and gives a correct reference to a passage in Dante's
_Inferno_.[12] He was inaccurate in his narratives and regardless of the
truth, as was ably shown by Las Casas,[13] while he habitually assumed the
credit of work which belonged to his superiors; and pretended to knowledge
and influence which he could never have possessed.[14] Though externally
civil and obliging, he harboured jealousy and hatred in his heart,[15]
and was disloyal towards the men under whom he served.[16] Of his natural
ability there can be no doubt. He wrote well, and some of his stories
are capitally told.[17] He must have been a plausible talker, so that,
by such men as Fonseca and Peter Martyr, the theoretical pretender was
taken at the value he put upon himself, and was believed to be a great
pilot and navigator.[18]

He was certainly not a practical navigator, much less a pilot, as the term
was understood in those days. Hojeda, in his evidence, said that he took
with him "Juan de la Cosa, and Morigo Vespuche, and other pilots". In
this sentence the "other pilots" must be intended to be coupled with
Juan de la Cosa, not with "Morigo Vespuche". A man of fifty years of
age could not go to sea for the first time and be a pilot. The thing
would be absurd now, but it would be much more absurd in the fifteenth
century. With the perfectly graduated and adjusted instruments, the
facilities for calculations, and the appliances of all kinds with which
the modern navigator is supplied, the business of the sea may be learnt
more quickly than in former days. Yet no one would now dream of calling
a middle-aged man an expert navigator because he had read a book on
astronomy and made one or two voyages. In the fifteenth century the
instruments were of the roughest kind, and much more depended on the
skill and intuitive instincts of the seaman himself, qualifications
which could only be acquired by a long training and many years of
experience. Vespucci has the assurance to talk of his astrolabe and
quadrant and sea chart, and to write disparagingly of the trained
pilots of whom he was jealous.[19] But his own writings make it clear
to any seaman that the Florentine contractor was merely a landlubber
with a smattering of Sacrobosco or some other work _De Sphæra_, which
enabled him to impose upon his brother landsmen by talking of climates,
of steering by winds, and of measuring diameters of fixed stars. Hojeda
certainly did not ship a pilot when he took Amerigo Vespucci on board,
but a very clever and very plausible landsman with a keen eye to his
own interests.

Alonzo de Hojeda left Cadiz, with four vessels, on May 20th, 1499.
Endeavouring to steer by the chart of Columbus, he made a landfall at
some distance to the south of Paria, off the mouths of the Orinoco.
Coasting along to the northward, he came to the Gulf of Paria, went out
by the Boca del Drago, and visited the island of Margarita. He then
proceeded along the coast of the continent, visited Curaçoa, which he
called the "Isla de los Gigantes", and came to the Gulf of Maracaibo,
where he found a village built on piles, which was named Venezuela, or
Little Venice. His most western point was the province of Cuquibacoa and
the Cabo de la Vela. His discovery consisted of 200 leagues of coast to
the west of Paria. Along this coast Hojeda obtained gold and pearls. He
had an encounter with the natives, in which one Spaniard was killed
and about twenty wounded, the place being named "Puerto Flechado". He
refitted in a harbour where the people were friendly, and which Amerigo
considered to be the best harbour in the world. Las Casas believed this
to have been Cariaco, near Cumana. On leaving the coast Hojeda proceeded
to Española, where he behaved in the outrageous manner described by Las
Casas,[20] remaining two months and seventeen days, from September 5th,
1499, to November 22nd, finally visiting some islands, probably the
Bahamas,[21] and carrying off 200 natives as slaves. Hojeda returned to
Cadiz in February 1500. In the same year Juan de la Cosa, the pilot of the
expedition, compiled his famous map of the world, on which he delineated
this new coast-line from Paria to Cabo de la Vela, the extreme point
of continental land that was known up to that time. On this coast-line
he placed twenty-two names, including the Boca del Drago, Margarita,
the "Isla de los Gigantes", the Lake of Venezuela (or Little Venice),
and the Cabo de la Vela. The map of Juan de la Cosa is important when
we come to the consideration of the statements in the letters of Vespucci.

The Florentine, on his return from this voyage, took up his residence
at Seville. Here, according to his own account, he received a message
from the King of Portugal, asking him to come to Lisbon. The bearer of
the message was a countryman of his own, named Giuliano di Bartolomeo
di Giocondo, and Vespucci would have us believe that the King attached
importance to his entering the Portuguese service. The Visconde de
Santarem has searched the archives in the Torre do Tombo at Lisbon, and
all the Portuguese documents in Paris, without once meeting with the
name of Vespucci. This absence of all official allusion to him points
to the conclusion that he never held any important position as pilot or
commander. He asserts that he joined a Portuguese expedition of discovery
along the coast of Brazil, which sailed on March 10th, 1501, and returned
on September 7th, 1502.[22] In the following March or April (1503)
he addressed a letter to the head of the mercantile house to which he
had belonged, Lorenzo Piero Francesco di Medici, giving his account of
the voyage. On May 10th, 1503, he sailed from Lisbon on another voyage,
returning on June 28th, 1504.

In the following September he finished writing the famous letter
containing an account of his alleged four voyages. The original Italian
version was sent to a magnificent Lord, who is supposed to have been Piero
Soderini, Gonfaloniere of Florence in 1504; and a French translation
was sent to Renè, Duke of Lorraine. Soon afterwards Vespucci left the
Portuguese service and returned to Spain.

In February 1505, the Admiral, Christopher Columbus, was laid up with
an illness at Seville, while his brother and his son Diego were at
court. Vespucci, having returned to Spain from Lisbon, went to pay his
respects to the great discoverer, and the Admiral entrusted him with a
letter to his son. "The bearer of this letter", wrote Columbus, "is going
to court on matters relating to navigation. He always showed a desire to
please me, and he is a very respectable man. Fortune has been adverse
to him, as to many others. His labours have not been so profitable to
him as might have been expected. He leaves me with the desire to do
me service, if it should be in his power." Vespucci had evidently been
complaining to the Admiral that his Portuguese service had been a failure,
and had brought him no profit. He went on to the court of Ferdinand,
and soon obtained employment; receiving letters of naturalisation on
the 24th of April 1505[23]; but there is no record of his ever having
been of any service to the Admiral. He was very plausible, and knew how
to ingratiate himself with men in power. It was intended to send him on
a voyage of discovery with Vicente Yañez Pinzon, and in 1506 and 1507
he was engaged in purchasing provisions for the voyage; but the idea of
despatching this expedition was abandoned in 1508.[24]

It has been supposed, from a sentence in a letter from Hieronimo Vianelo,
the Venetian Ambassador, dated at Burgos on December 23rd, 1506, that
Vespucci accompanied Juan de la Cosa on a voyage of discovery to the
Indies during that year.[25] "The two ships have arrived from the Indies
which went on a voyage of discovery under Juan Biscaino and Almerigo
Fiorentino." But Vianelo must have been misinformed. There are documentary
proofs that Vespucci was in Spain until August 1506. It is highly
probable that the voluble Florentine retailed the story of Juan de la
Cosa's voyage in such a way as to give Vianelo the impression that the
narrator took part in it himself. The story of the voyage, as we find it
in the letter of the Venetian Ambassador, is quite in Vespucci's manner.

On the 6th of August 1508, Amerigo Vespucci received the appointment of
Chief Pilot (_Piloto Mayor_) of Spain, with a salary of 75,000 maravedis
a year.[26] The "Real Titulo", or commission, is a curious and very
interesting document. He is ordered to prepare an authoritative chart,
called a "Padron General", on which all discoveries are to be shown,
and whence the charts for all ships are to be copied; and he is also
to examine all pilots in the use of the astrolabe and quadrant, and
to give instruction in his house at Seville. Vespucci was able to give
theoretical instruction in cosmography; although a man who first went
to sea when he was nearly fifty, and who had only made three voyages,
could not be an experienced pilot. With such experts as Juan de la Cosa,
Juan Diaz de Solis, Vicente Pinzon, and others, available, it was indeed
a strange selection. But Ferdinand and Fonseca were notorious for their
bad appointments. Columbus was sent home in chains, Blasco Nuñez de Balboa
was beheaded; while high places, for which they were more or less unfit,
were entrusted to Ovando, Bobadilla, Pedrarias, and Vespucci.

Vespucci held the appointment of Chief Pilot until the 22nd of February
1512, when he died at Seville, aged 61. He had married a Spaniard
named Maria Cerezo, but left no children. His widow received a pension
of 10,000 maravedis,[27] to be paid out of the salary of her husband's
successor,[28] Juan Diaz de Solis. Vespucci left his papers to his nephew
Giovanni, son of his brother Antonio, who received the appointment of a
royal pilot, with a salary of 20,000 maravedis, on May 22nd, 1512.[29]
He went as chief pilot in the expedition of Pedrarias Davila in 1514;
and is mentioned as a royal pilot in 1515 and 1516. In 1524 he was a
member of the Badajoz Commission, but was dismissed in March 1525.

This is all that is known of the life of Amerigo Vespucci, beyond what
is contained in his own letters, which we will now proceed to consider
in detail.

Of the two letters of Vespucci that have been preserved, the earliest
was written from Lisbon in March or April 1503, and was addressed to
Lorenzo Piero Francesco di Medici. The original Italian text is lost, but
it was translated into Latin by "Jocundus Interpreter", who is supposed
to have been the same Giuliano di Bartolomeo di Giocondo who brought
the invitation to Vespucci to come to Portugal in 1501.[30] The letter
describes the voyage of discovery sent from Lisbon in May 1501, in which
Vespucci alleged that he took part. He alludes to a previous letter
in which he had fully described "the new countries", and continues:
"it is lawful to call it a new world, because none of these countries
were known to our ancestors, and to all who hear about them they will
be entirely new." He does not mention the name of the commander of the
expedition, and assumes all the glory of the discovery for himself. "_I_
have found a continent in that southern part more populous and more
full of animals than our Europe or Asia or Africa."[31] Moreover, the
safety of the ships, their navigation across the ocean, their escape
from perils, were all due to this wonderful beef contractor, if we are
to believe his own account. "If my companions had not trusted in me,
to whom cosmography was known, no one, not the leader of our navigation,
would have known where we were after running five hundred leagues." He
goes on to tell us that his "knowledge of the marine chart, and the rules
taught by it, were more worth than all the pilots in the world".[32]
After relating some fictitious stories about the natives and their
cannibalism, and giving a glowing but vague account of the vegetation,
he concludes with some absurd remarks about the stars of the southern
hemisphere, which he has the assurance to tell us were measured by him
to see which was the largest. The letter concludes with the statement
that this was his third voyage, as he had made two by order of the King
of Spain. This is the first intimation of a design to make two voyages
out of the Hojeda expedition, one of which was to precede the Admiral's
discovery of the mainland. He also announces his intention of collecting
all the wonderful things he had seen into a cosmographical book, that
his record may live with future generations, intending to complete it,
with the aid of friends, at home. The letter shows the character of the
man, and how little reliance can be placed on his statements.

The letter to Medici was printed very soon after it was written. The
first issue, entitled _Mundus Novus_, consisting of four 4to leaves,
and the second, _Epistola Albericij de Novo Mundo_, are without place
or date. A copy of the third, printed at Augsburg in 1504, and entitled
_Mundus Novus_, is in the Grenville Library. Then followed two others,
and the sixth issue was the early Paris edition of Jean Lambert, a copy
of which is in the Bibliothèque Nationale. Another Paris edition, nearly
as old, is in the Grenville Library. In 1505, an issue, entitled _De Ora
Antarctica_, and edited by Ringmann, appeared at Strasbourg. The letter
was also included in the book of voyages, _Paesi novamente retrovati_,
printed at Vicenza in 1507, where it was called _Novo Mondo da Alb.
Vesputio_. It was thus widely circulated over Europe, and Vespucci
obtained the credit of discoveries made by the unnamed Portuguese
commander. The title, _Novus Mundus_, is taken from the opening boast
of his letter, that it is lawful to call the discovery _a new world_
because no one had ever seen it before. It was thus that Vespucci got
his name connected, throughout Europe, with the discovery of a New World,
and this prepared the way for the proposal to give it the name of America!

The more important letter of Vespucci, containing the account of
his alleged four voyages, was written in September 1504, a short
time before he left Portugal. A copy, in French, was sent to René
II, Duke of Lorraine, while the Italian original was addressed to a
"Magnificent Lord", who is supposed, with much probability, to have
been Piero Soderini, the Gonfaloniere of Florence from 1502 to 1512.
Vespucci speaks of him as having been his schoolfellow, and as being, at
the time the letter was written, in a high official position at Florence.

