The Project Gutenberg EBook of General Anatomy, Applied to Physiology and
Medicine, Vol. 1 (of 3), by Xavier Bichat

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: General Anatomy, Applied to Physiology and Medicine, Vol. 1 (of 3)

Author: Xavier Bichat

Translator: George Hayward

Release Date: January 7, 2018 [EBook #56118]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

I have endeavoured, as far as possible, in classing the functions, to
follow the path marked out by nature herself. I have laid, in my work
upon Life and Death, the foundations of this classification, which I
pursued before I published this work. Aristotle, Buffon, &c. have seen
in man two kinds of functions, one which connects him with external
bodies, the other, which serves for his nourishment. Grimaud brought
forward again this idea, which is as great as it is true, in his course
of physiology and in his memoir upon nutrition; but by considering
it in too general a manner, he did not analyze it with sufficient
exactness, he ranked among the external functions, only sensation and
motion, he did not describe the brain as the centre of these functions,
nor place the voice among them, which is however one of the great
means of communication, with the bodies that surround us. He did not
analyze more accurately the internal functions. He did not point out
their connexion in the elaboration of nutritive matter, where each
works in its turn, if I may so express myself; nor show the distinctive
characters, which separate generation from all the other functions
relating to the individual alone. Besides, the distinction of internal
and external functions was only presented as a general sketch in his
Memoir upon Nutrition, and not as a means of classification. He did not
avail himself of it, in the division of the functions, in his lectures,
of which many manuscripts arranged by himself, are to be met with at
the present time; in these he examined, 1st. osteogony, which was
treated at much length; 2d. the action of the muscles; 3d. the action
of the vessels or the circulation; 4th. generation; 5th. the action of
the organs of the senses; 6th. the action of the brain and nerves; 7th.
digestion; 8th. secretion; 9th. respiration, &c. From this it may be
perceived, that Grimaud, like preceding authors, mixed together all the
functions without referring them to certain general heads.

In reflecting upon the division pointed out above, I soon saw that it
was not only one of those general views, one of those great outlines,
that are oftentimes made by men of genius who cultivate physiology,
but that it might become the permanent basis of a methodical
classification. To come at this classification I observed that it was
necessary at first to refer all the functions to two great classes,
one relating to the individual, the other to the species; that these
two classes had nothing in common, but the general connexion that
unites all the phenomena of living bodies; but a variety of distinctive
attributes characterize them, which cannot be separated from them.

These two first classes being rigorously defined, and their limits
established by nature, I sought to discover in each, orders equally
natural; this was easy in the functions relating to the individual.
In fact, this was the place for the general outline of Aristotle and
Buffon; but it was not to be presented in too general a manner; the
nature and connexion of the functions peculiar to each order, were to
be accurately assigned.

I called the order of functions that connects us with external bodies,
animal life, thus indicating that this order belongs alone to animals,
that it is more with them than with vegetables, and that it is the
addition of these functions that particularly distinguishes them
from vegetables. I called organic life, the order that serves for the
constant composition and decomposition of our bodies, because this life
is common to all organized beings, vegetables as well as animals; and
because the only condition of enjoying it is organization; so that it
forms a boundary between organic and inorganic bodies, as animal life
serves to separate the two classes that form the first.

Animal life is composed of the action of the senses which receive
impressions, of the brain which perceives them, reflects, and wills,
of the voluntary muscles and larynx that execute this volition, and of
the nerves which are the agents of transmission. The brain is truly
the central organ of this life. Digestion, circulation, respiration,
exhalation, absorption, secretion, nutrition, calorification, compose
organic life, which has the heart for its principal and central organ.

I place calorification here, because it is evident from what I have
said under the article upon the capillary systems, that it is a
function analogous to secretion, exhalation and nutrition. It is truly
a separation of combined caloric, from the mass of blood. It is, if
the expression is preferred, a secretion or exhalation of that fluid
in every part of the body. I have not even at present given this place
to heat in my physiological classification: but in reflecting upon the
method of its production, it will be seen that it ought to have it.

The two orders of the first class being established, it was easy to
assign those of the second, which are three in number: 1st. functions
belonging to the male; 2d. those belonging to the female; 3d. those
arising from an union of the two sexes and the product of this union;
these are the three orders.

Such is the classification that I made in my Lectures on Physiology;
it has evidently nothing in common with any of those that are found
in physiological works; and if you reflect upon it a little, it
will appear I think infinitely preferable to any of them. Observe in
fine, that each class and each order have general and characteristic
attributes that particularly distinguish them, and which being
applicable to all the functions of that order, mark a difference
between them and all the functions of any other order. I have pointed
out moreover the distinctive attributes of animal and of organic life;
I have shown that the organs of one are symmetrical, those of the other
irregular; that there is a harmony in the functions of the first, a
discordance in those of the second; that one commences sooner and
terminates later, &c.

I have demonstrated, that the cerebral nerves belong especially to
animal life, the nerves of the ganglions to the organic, which appears
to me to be a remarkable difference, and which has induced me to make
two systems of the nerves, that anatomists have united in one. The
first, belonging to animal life, is composed of the cerebral nerves,
the other to organic, is formed of the nerves of the ganglions, or what
is commonly called the great sympathetic.

But it is the vital powers especially that distinguish one life from
another. I have shown that one kind of sensibility and contractility
belongs to animal life, and another to organic. Now as these vital
properties are the principle of the functions, it is evident that the
division of these properties demonstrates that that of the two lives is
not an abstraction, but that it is nature herself that has fixed the
limits, since she has made particular properties for each.

It is impossible to form a precise idea of the vital properties,
without admitting the division I have made. How many disputes there
have been, upon the subject of sensibility! Not one of them would
have taken place, if the attributes of animal life had been properly
distinguished from those of the organic. Certainly no one will
hereafter confound in one view, as frequently has been done, the
faculty that the heart has of being sensible to the entrance of the
blood, without transmitting that impression, and the faculty that the
skin, the other senses, the nerves, &c. have, not only of feeling the
impression of external bodies, but of transmitting it to the brain, so
that the sensation may be perceived.

If you include under one common name of irritability, the motions of
muscles that contract only by stimuli, and those which the cerebral
influence puts in action, it is impossible that you should be
understood.

There has been much discussion during the last age, upon the point,
whether sensibility is the same as contractility, or if these two
properties can be separated. Each of the two opinions seem to have
rested upon an equally solid foundation. But all these disputes
will be done away, by admitting the distinction I have made in the
vital properties. 1st. In animal life, then, it is evident, that
contractility is not a necessary consequence of sensibility; thus
frequently external objects make for a long time an impression upon
us, and yet the voluntary muscles remain unmoved. 2d. On the other
hand, in organic life, these two properties are never separated. In
the involuntary motions of the heart, the stomach, the intestines,
&c. there is first an excitement of the organic sensibility, and
then an action of the sensible organic contractility. In the same
manner, in the motions necessary to secretion, exhalation, &c. when
the organic sensibility has been brought into action, immediately
insensible organic contractility takes place. It is that they may
be studied better, and appreciated more accurately, that in organic
life, I separate these two kinds of contractility from sensibility.
In the natural state they are inseparable. Hence why the passive
sympathies of animal sensibility are very different from those of
animal contractility, and make two distinct classes, whilst the
passive sympathies of organic sensibility can never be separated from
the corresponding contractilities. We suffer by sympathy, and are
sympathetically convulsed in a distinct manner; these two things are
almost always separate. On the contrary, sensation and motion in the
organic sympathies are inseparable.

I could prove by many examples, that all the disputes, and all the
diversities of opinion, upon the subject of the vital properties,
proceed only from this cause, that those which preside over the
functions of one life, have not been distinguished from those which put
into action the functions of the other.

Let us return to my physiological division; I will now give a table
of it, which, presenting it under one point of view, will give a more
precise idea of the classification. This table comprehends, 1st. the
prolegomena of the science; 2d. the exposition of the functions. In the
prolegomena, every thing is referred to two great considerations; on
the one hand to organic texture, described in a general manner, and on
the other to life, considered in relation to its great attributes.

