The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Progress of Invention in the Nineteenth
Century., by Edward W. Byrn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Progress of Invention in the Nineteenth Century.

Author: Edward W. Byrn

Release Date: December 2, 2012 [EBook #41538]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

To appreciate them let us briefly contrast the conditions of to-day with
those of a hundred years ago. This is no easy task, for the comparison
not only involves the experiences of two generations, but it is like the
juxtaposition of a star with the noonday sun, whose superior brilliancy
obliterates the lesser light. But reverse the wheels of progress, and
let us make a quick run of one hundred years into the past, and what are
our experiences? Before we get to our destination we find the wheels
themselves beginning to thump and jolt, and the passage becomes more
difficult, more uncomfortable, and so much slower. We are no longer
gliding along in a luxurious palace car behind a magnificent locomotive,
traveling on steel rails, at sixty miles an hour, but we find ourselves
nearing the beginning of the Nineteenth Century in a rickety, rumbling,
dusty stage-coach. Pause! and consider the change for a moment in some
of its broader aspects. First, let us examine the present more closely,
for the average busy man, never looking behind him for comparisons, does
not fully appreciate or estimate at its real value the age in which he
lives. There are to-day (statistics of 1898), 445,064 miles of railway
tracks in the world. This would build seventeen different railway
tracks, of two rails each, around the entire world, or would girdle
mother earth with thirty-four belts of steel. If extended in straight
lines, it would build a track of two rails to the moon, and more than a
hundred thousand miles beyond it. The United States has nearly half of
the entire mileage of the world, and gets along with 36,746 locomotives,
nearly as many passenger coaches, and more than a million and a quarter
of freight cars, which latter, if coupled together, would make nearly
three continuous trains reaching across the American continent from the
Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. The movement of passenger trains is
equivalent to dispatching thirty-seven trains per day around the world,
and the freight train movement is in like manner equal to dispatching
fifty-three trains a day around the world. Add to this the railway
business controlled by other countries, and one gets some idea of how
far the stage-coach has been left behind. To-day we eat supper in one
city, and breakfast in another so many hundreds of miles east or west as
to be compelled to set our watches to the new meridian of longitude in
order to keep our engagement. But railroads and steam-cars constitute
only one of the stirring elements of modern civilization. As we make the
backward run of one hundred years we have passed by many milestones of
progress. Let us see if we can count some of them as they disappear
behind us. We quickly lose the telephone, phonograph and graphophone. We
no longer see the cable-cars or electric railways. The electric lights
have gone out. The telegraph disappears. The sewing machine, reaper, and
thresher have passed away, and so also have all india-rubber goods. We
no longer see any photographs, photo-engravings, photolithographs, or
snap-shot cameras. The wonderful octuple web perfecting printing press;
printing, pasting, cutting, folding, and counting newspapers at the rate
of 96,000 per hour, or 1,600 per minute, shrinks at the beginning of the
century into an insignificant prototype. We lose all planing and
wood-working machinery, and with it the endless variety of sashes,
doors, blinds, and furniture in unlimited variety. There are no
gas-engines, no passenger elevators, no asphalt pavement, no steam fire
engine, no triple-expansion steam engine, no Giffard injector, no
celluloid articles, no barbed wire fences, no time-locks for safes, no
self-binding harvesters, no oil nor gas wells, no ice machines nor cold
storage. We lose air engines, stem-winding watches, cash-registers and
cash-carriers, the great suspension bridges, and tunnels, the Suez
Canal, iron frame buildings, monitors and heavy ironclads, revolvers,
torpedoes, magazine guns and Gatling guns, linotype machines, all
practical typewriters, all pasteurizing, knowledge of microbes or
disease germs, and sanitary plumbing, water-gas, soda water fountains,
air brakes, coal-tar dyes and medicines, nitro-glycerine, dynamite and
guncotton, dynamo electric machines, aluminum ware, electric
locomotives, Bessemer steel with its wonderful developments, ocean
cables, enameled iron ware, Welsbach gas burners, electric storage
batteries, the cigarette machine, hydraulic dredges, the roller mills,
middlings purifiers and patent-process flour, tin can machines, car
couplings, compressed air drills, sleeping cars, the dynamite gun, the
McKay shoe machine, the circular knitting machine, the Jacquard loom,
wood pulp for paper, fire alarms, the use of anæsthetics in surgery,
oleomargarine, street sweepers, Artesian wells, friction matches, steam
hammers, electro-plating, nail machines, false teeth, artificial limbs
and eyes, the spectroscope, the Kinetoscope or moving pictures,
acetylene gas, X-ray apparatus, horseless carriages, and--but, enough!
the reader exclaims, and indeed it is not pleasant to contemplate the
loss. The negative conditions of that period extend into such an
appalling void that we stop short, shrinking from the thought of what it
would mean to modern civilization to eliminate from its life these
potent factors of its existence.

Returning to the richness and fullness of the present life, we shall
first note chronologically the milestones and finger boards which mark
this great tramway of progress, and afterward consider separately the
more important factors of progress.




CHAPTER II.

CHRONOLOGY OF LEADING INVENTIONS OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.


1800--Volta’s Chemical Battery for producing Electricity. Louis Robert’s
Machine for Making Continuous Webs of Paper.

1801--Trevithick’s Steam Coach (first automobile). Brunel’s Mortising
Machine. Jacquard’s Pattern Loom. First Fire Proof Safe by Richard
Scott. Columbium discovered by Hatchett.

1802--Trevithick and Vivian’s British patent for Running Coaches by
Steam. Charlotte Dundas (Steamboat) towed canal Boats on the Clyde.
Tantalum discovered by Ekeberg. First Photographic Experiments by
Wedgewood and Davy. Bramah’s Planing Machine.

1803--Carpue’s Experiments on Therapeutic Application of Electricity.
Iridium and Osmium discovered by Tenant, and Cerium by Berzelius. Wm.
Horrocks applies Steam to the Loom.

1804--Rhodium and Palladium discovered by Wollaston. First Steam Railway
and Locomotive by Richard Trevithick. Capt. John Stevens applies twin
Screw Propellers in Steam Navigation. Winsor takes British patent for
Illuminating Gas, lights Lyceum Theatre, and organizes First Gas
Company. Lucas’ process making Malleable Iron Castings.

1805--Life Preserver invented by John Edwards of London. Electro-plating
invented by Brugnatelli.

1806--Jeandeau’s Knitting Machine.

1807--First practical Steamboat between New York and Albany (Fulton’s
Clermont). Discovery of Potassium, Sodium and Boron by Davy. Forsyth’s
Percussion Lock for Guns.

1808--Barium, Strontium, and Calcium discovered by Davy. Polarization of
Light from Reflection by Malus. Voltaic arc discovered by Davy.

1809--Sommering’s Multi-wire Telegraphy.

1810--System of Homœopathy organized by Hahnemann.

1811--Discovery of Metal Iodine by M. Courtois. Blenkinsop’s Locomotive.
Colored Polarization of Light by Arago. Thornton and Hall’s Breech
Loading Musket.

1812--London the First City lighted by Gas. Ritter’s Storage Battery.
Schilling proposes use of Electricity to blow up mines. Zamboni’s Dry
Pile (prototype of dry battery).

1813--Howard’s British patent for Vacuum Pan for refining sugar.
Hedley’s Locomotive “Puffing Billy.” Introduction of Stereotyping in the
United States by David Bruce.

1814--London Times printed by König’s rotary steam press. Stephenson’s
First Locomotive. Demologos built by Fulton (the first steam war
vessel). Heliography by Niépce. Discovery of Cyanogen by Gay Lussac. The
Kaleidoscope invented by Sir David Brewster.

1815--Safety Lamp by Sir Humphrey Davy. Seidlitz Powders invented. Gas
Meter by Clegg.

1816--The “Draisine” Bicycle. Circular Knitting Machine by Brunel.

1817--Discovery of Selenium by Berzelius, Cadmium by Stromeyer, and
Lithium by Arfvedson. Hunt’s Pin Machine.

1818--Brunel’s patent Subterranean and Submarine tunnels.
Electro-Magnetism discovered by Oersted of Copenhagen.

1819--American Steamer Savannah from New York first to cross Atlantic.
Laennec discovers Auscultation and invents Stethoscope. Blanchard’s
Lathe for turning Irregular Forms.

1820--Electro-Magnetic Multiplier by Schweigger. Discoveries in
Electro-magnetism by Ampere and Arago. Bohnenberg’s Electroscope.
Discovery of Quinine by Pelletier and Caventou. Malam’s Gas Meter.

1821--Faraday converts Electric Current into Mechanical Motion.

1822--Babbage Calculation Engine.

1823--Liquefaction and Solidification of Gases by Faraday, and
foundation of ammonia absorption ice machine laid by him. Seebeck
discovers Thermo-electricity. Silicon discovered by Berzelius.

1824--Discovery of metal Zirconium by Berzelius. Wright’s Pin Machine.

1825--First Passenger Railway in the world opened between Stockton and
Darlington. Sturgeon invents prototype of Electro Magnet. Beaumont’s
discoveries in Digestion (Alexis San Martin 1825-32).

1826--Discovery of Bromine by M. Balard. Barlow’s Electrical Spur Wheel.
First Railroad in United States built near Quincy, Mass.

1827--Aluminum reduced by Wohler. Ohm’s Law of Electrical Resistance.
Hackworth’s Improvements in Locomotive. Friction Matches by John
Walker.

1828--Neilson’s Hot Blast for Smelting Iron. Professor Henry invents the
Spool Electro Magnet. Tubular Locomotive Boiler by Seguin. First
Artificial production of organic compounds (urea) by Wohler. Thorium
discovered by Berzelius. Yttrium and Glucinum discovered by Wohler.
Nicol’s prism for Polarized Light. Woodworth’s wood planer. Spinning
Ring invented by John Thorp.

1829--Becquerel’s Double Fluid Galvanic Battery. George Stephenson’s
Locomotive, “Rocket,” takes prizes of Liverpool and Manchester Railway.
Importation of “Stourbridge Lion,” the first locomotive to run in the
United States. Daguerreotype invented. Discovery of Magnesium by Bussey.

1830--Vanadium discovered by Sefstroem. Abbe Dal Negro’s Electrically
operated pendulum. Ericsson’s Steam Fire Engine.

1831--Faraday discovers Magnetic Induction. Professor Henry telegraphs
signals. Professor Henry invents his Electric Motor. Locomotive “John
Bull” put in service on Camden and Amboy R. R. Chloroform discovered by
Guthrie. McCormick first experiments with Reaper.

1832--Professor Morse conceives the idea of Electric Telegraph. First
Magneto-Electric Machines by Saxton in United States and Pixii in
France. Sturgeon’s Rotary Electric Motor. Baldwin’s first locomotive,
“Old Ironsides,” built. Link Motion for Locomotive Engine invented by
James. Chloral-hydrate discovered by Liebig.

1833--Steam Whistle adopted by Stephenson. Hussey’s Reaper patented.

1834--Jacobi’s Rotary Electric Motor. Henry Bessemer electro-plates lead
castings with copper. Faraday demonstrates relation of chemical and
electrical force. McCormick Reaper patented. Carbolic Acid discovered by
Runge. Perkins’ Ice Machine.

1835--Forbes proves the absence of heat in Moonlight. Burden’s horse
shoe Machine.

1836--The Daniell Constant Battery invented. Acetylene Gas produced by
Edmond Davy. Colt’s Revolver.

1837--Cooke and Wheatstone’s British patent for Electric telegraph.
Steinheil discovered feasibility of using the earth for return section
of electric circuit. Davenport’s Electric Motor. Spencer’s experiments
in electrotyping. Galvanized Iron invented by Craufurd.

1838--Professor Morse’s French patent for Telegraph. Jacobi’s
Galvano-plastic process for making Electrotype Printing Plates.
Reflecting Stereoscope by Wheatstone. Dry Gas Meter by Defries.

1839--Wreck of Royal George blown up by Electro Blasting. Jacobi builds
first Electrically propelled Boat. Fox Talbot makes Photo Prints from
Negatives. Professors Draper and Morse make first Photographic
Portraits. Mungo Ponton applies Bichromate of Potash in Photography.
Goodyear discovers process of Vulcanizing Rubber. Lanthanum and Didymium
discovered by Mosander. Babbit Metal invented.

1840--Professor Morse’s United States patent for Electric Telegraph.
Professor Grove makes first Incandescent Electric Lamp. Celestial
Photography by Professor Draper.

1841--Artesian well bored at Grenelle, Paris. Sickel’s Steam Cut-off.
Talbotype Photos. M. Triger invents Pneumatic Caissons.

1842--First production of Illuminating Gas from water (water gas) by M.
Selligue. Robt. Davidson builds Electric Locomotive. Nasmyth patents
Steam Hammer.

1843--Joule’s demonstration as to the Nature of Force. Erbium and
Terbium discovered by Mosander. The Thames Tunnel Opened.

1844--First Telegraphic Message sent by Morse from Washington to
Baltimore. Application Nitrous Oxide Gas as an Anæsthetic by Dr. Wells.

1845--Ruthenium discovered by Klaws. The Starr-King Incandescent
Electric Lamp. The Hoe Type Revolving Machine.

1846--House’s Printing Telegraph. Howe’s Sewing Machine. Suez Canal
Started (fourteen years building). Crusell of St. Petersburgh invents
Electric Cautery. Use of Ether as Anæsthetic by Dr. Morton. Artificial
Legs. Discovery of Planet Neptune. Sloan patents Gimlet Pointed Screw.
Gun Cotton discovered by Schönbein.

1847--Chloroform introduced by Dr. Simpson. Nitro-Glycerine discovered
by Sobrero. Time-Locks invented by Savage.

1848--Discovery of Satellites of Saturn by Lassell. Bain’s Chemical
Telegraph. Bakewell’s Fac-Simile Telegraph.

1849--Bourdon’s Pressure Gauge. Lenticular Stereoscope by Brewster.
Hibbert’s Latch Needle for Knitting Machine. Corliss Engine.

1850--First Submarine Cable--Dover to Calais. Collodion Process in
Photography. Mercerizing Cloth. American Machine-made Watches.

1851--Dr. Page’s Electric Locomotive. The Ruhmkorff Coil. Scott Archer’s
Collodion Process in Photography. Seymour’s Self-Raker for Harvesters.
Helmholtz invents Opthalmoscope. Maynard Breech Loading Rifle.

1852--Channing and Farmer Fire Alarm Telegraph. Fox Talbot first uses
reticulated screen for Half Tone Printing.

1853--Gintl’s Duplex Telegraph invented. Electric Lamps devised by
Foucault and Duboscq. Watt and Burgess Soda Process for Making Wood
Pulp.

1854--Wilson’s Four Motion Feed for Sewing Machines. Melhuish invents
the Photographic Roll Films. Hermann’s Diamond Drill. Smith and Wesson
Magazine Firearm (Foundation of the Winchester).

1855--Bessemer Process of Making Steel. Hjorth invents Dynamo Electric
Machine. Ericsson’s Air Engine. Niagara Suspension Bridge. Dr. J. M.
Taupenot invents Dry Plate Photography. The Michaux Bicycle.

1856--Hughes Printing Telegraph. Alliance Magneto Electric Machine.
Woodruff Sleeping Car. First commercial Aniline Dyes by Perkins. Siemens
Regenerative Furnace.

1857--Rogues’ Gallery established in New York. Introduction of Iron
Floor Beams in building Cooper Institute. Siemens describes principle of
Self Intensification of Cold (now used in ice and liquid air machines).

1858--Phelps Printing Telegraph invented. First Atlantic Cable Laid.
Paper pulp from Wood by Voelter. First use of Electric Light in Light
House at South Foreland. Giffard Steam Injector. Gardner patents first
Underground Cable Car System.

1859--Discovery Coal Oil in United States. Moses G. Farmer subdivides
Electric Current through a number of Electric Lamps, and lights first
dwelling by Electricity. Great Eastern launched. Osborne perfects modern
process of Photolithography. Professors Kirchhoff and Bunsen map Solar
Spectrum, and establish Spectrum Analysis.

1860--Rubidium and Caesium discovered by Bunsen. Gaston Planté’s Storage
Battery. Reis’ Crude Telephone. Thallium discovered by Crookes, and
Indium by Reich and Richter. Spencer and Henry Magazine Rifles. Carré’s
Ammonia Absorption Ice Machine.

1861--McKay Shoe Sewing Machine. Calcium Carbide produced by Wohler.
Col. Green invents Drive Well. Otis Passenger Elevator. First Barbed
Wire Fence.

1862--Ericsson’s Iron Clad Turret Monitor. Emulsions and improvements in
Dry Plate Photography by Russell and Sayce. The Gatling Gun. Timby’s
Revolving Turret.

1863--Schultz white gunpowder.

1864--Nobel’s Explosive Gelatine. Rubber Dental Plates. Cabin John
(Washington Aqueduct) Bridge finished (longest masonry span in the
world).

1865--Louis Pasteur’s work in Bacteriology begun. Martin’s Process of
making Steel.

1866--Wilde’s Dynamo Electric Machine. Burleigh’s Compressed Air Rock
Drill. Whitehead Torpedo.

1867--Siemens’ Dynamo Electric Machine. Dynamite Invented. Tilghman’s
Sulphite Process for making Wood Pulp.

1868--Brickill’s Water Heater for Steam Fire Engines. Moncrieff’s
Disappearing Gun Carriage. Oleomargarine invented by Mege. Sholes
Typewriter.

1869--Suez Canal Opened. Pacific Railway Completed. First Westinghouse
Air-Brakes.

1870--The Gramme Dynamo Electric Machine. Windhausen Refrigerating
Machines. Beleaguered Paris communicates with outer world through
Micro-Photographs. Hailer’s Rebounding Gun Lock. Dittmar’s Gunpowder.

1871--Hoe’s Web Perfecting Press set up in Office New York Tribune. The
Locke Grain Binder. Bridge Work in Dentistry. Mount Cenis Tunnel opened
for traffic. Phosphorus Bronze. Ingersoll Compressed Air Rock Drill.

1872--Stearns perfects Duplex Telegraph. Westinghouse Improved automatic
Air Brake. Lyall Positive Motion Loom.

1873--Janney Automatic Car Coupler. Oleomargarine patented in United
States by Mege.

1874--Edison’s Quadruplex Telegraph. Gorham’s Twine Binder for
Harvesters. Barbed Wire Machines. St. Louis Bridge finished.

1875--Lowe’s patent for Water Gas (illuminating gas made from water).
Roller Mills and Middlings Purifier for making flour. Gallium discovered
by Boisbaudran. Pictet Ice Machine. Gamgee’s Skating Rinks. First Cash
Carrier for Stores.

1876--Alexander Graham Bell’s Speaking Telephone. Hydraulic Dredges.
Cigarette Machinery. Photographing by Electric Light by Vander Weyde.
Edison’s Electric Pen. Steam Feed for Saw Mill Carriages. Introduction
of Cable Cars by Hallidie.

1877--Phonograph invented by Edison. Otto Gas Engine. Jablochkoff
Electric Candle. Sawyer-Man Electric Lamp. Berliner’s Telephone
Transmitter of variable resistance (pat. Nov. 17, ’91). Edison’s Carbon
Microphone (pat. May 3, ’92). Discovery of Satellites of Mars by
Professor Asaph Hall, and its so-called Canals by Schiaparelli.
Liquefaction of Oxygen, Nitrogen and Air by Pictet and Cailletet.

1878--Development of Remington Typewriter. Edison invents Carbon
Filament for Incandescent Electric Lamp. Gelatino-Bromide Emulsions in
Photography. Ytterbium discovered by Marignac. Birkenhead Yielding
Spinning Spindle Bearing. Gessner Cloth Press.

1879--Dr. Siemens’ Electric Railway at Berlin. Mississippi Jetties
completed by Capt. Eads. Samarium discovered by Boisbaudran, Scandium by
Nilson, and Thulium by Cleve. The Lee Magazine Rifle.

1880--Faure’s Storage Battery. Eberth and Koch discover Bacillus of
Typhoid Fever, and Sternberg the Bacillus of Pneumonia. Edison’s
Magnetic Ore Concentrator. Greener’s Hammerless Gun. Rabbeth Spinning
Spindle patented.

1881--Telegraphing by Induction by Wm. W. Smith. Blake Telephone
Transmitter. Reece Button Hole Machine. Rack-a-rock (explosive)
patented.

1882--Bacillus of Tuberculosis identified by Koch, and Bacillus of
Hydrophobia by Pasteur. St. Gothard Tunnel opened for traffic.

1883--Brooklyn Suspension Bridge Completed.

1884--Antipyrene. Mergenthaler’s first Linotype Printing Machine
invented. Bacillus of Cholera identified by Koch, Bacillus of Diphtheria
by Loeffler, and Bacillus of Lockjaw by Nicolaier.

1885--Cowles’ Process of Manufacturing Aluminum. First Electric Railway
in America installed between Baltimore and Hampden. Neodymium and
Praseodymium discovered by Welsbach. Welsbach Gas Burner invented.
Blowing up of Flood Rock, New York Harbor. “Bellite” produced by Lamm,
and “Melinite” by Turpin.

1886--Graphophone invented. Electric Welding by Elihu Thomson. Gadolinum
discovered by Marignac, and Germanium by Winkler.

1887--McArthur and Forrest’s Cyanide Process of Obtaining Gold. Tesla’s
System of Polyphase Currents.

1888--Electrocution of Criminals adopted in New York State. Harvey’s
Process of Annealing Armor Plate. De Laval’s Rotary Steam Turbine.
“Kodak” Snap-Shot Camera. Lick Telescope. De Chardonnet’s Process of
Making Artificial Silk.

1889--Nickel Steel. Hall’s Process of Making Aluminum. Dudley Dynamite
Gun. “Cordite” (Smokeless Powder) produced by Abel and Dewar.

1890--Mergenthaler’s Improved Linotype Machine. Photography in Colors.
The Great Forth Bridge finished. Krag-Jorgensen Magazine Rifle.

1891--Parsons’ Rotary Steam Turbine. The Northrup Loom.

1892--The explosive “Indurite” invented by Professor Munroe.

1893--Acheson’s process for making Carborundum. The Yerkes Telescope.
Edison’s Kinetoscope. Production of Calcium Carbide in Electric Furnace
by Willson.

1894--Discovery of element Argon by Lord Rayleigh and Professor Ramsey.
Thorite produced by Bawden.

1895--X-Rays discovered and applied by Roentgen. Acetylene Gas from
Calcium Carbide by Willson. Krupp Armor Plate. Lindé’s Liquid air
apparatus.

1896--Marconi’s System of Wireless Telegraphy. Buffington-Crozier
Disappearing Gun.

1897--Schlick’s System of Balancing Marine Engines. Discovery of Krypton
by Ramsey and Travers.

1898--Horry and Bradley’s process of making Calcium Carbide. Discovery
of Neon and Metargon by Ramsey and Travers; Coronium by Nasini; Xenon by
Ramsey; Monium by Crookes, and Etherion by Brush. Mercerizing Cloth
under tension to render it Silky.

1899--Marconi Telegraphs without wire across the English Channel.
Oceanic launched, the largest steamer ever built.

1900--The Grande Lunette Telescope of Paris Exposition.




CHAPTER III.

THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH.

    THE VOLTAIC PILE--DANIELL’S BATTERY--USE OF CONDUCTING WIRE BY
    WEBER--STEINHEIL EMPLOYS EARTH AS RETURN CIRCUIT--PROF. HENRY’S
    ELECTRO MAGNET, AND FIRST TELEGRAPHIC EXPERIMENT--PROF. MORSE’S
    TELEGRAPHIC CODE AND REGISTER--FIRST LINE BETWEEN WASHINGTON
    AND BALTIMORE--BAIN’S CHEMICAL TELEGRAPH--GINTL’S DUPLEX
    TELEGRAPH--EDISON’S QUADRUPLEX--HOUSE’S PRINTING TELEGRAPH--FAC
    SIMILE TELEGRAPHS--CHANNING AND FARMER FIRE ALARM--TELEGRAPHING BY
    INDUCTION--WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY BY MARCONI--STATISTICS.


In the effort to lengthen out the limited span of life into a greater
record of results, time becomes an object of economy. To save time is to
live long, and this in a pre-eminent degree is accomplished by the
telegraph. Of all the inventions which man has called into existence to
aid him in the fulfillment of his destiny, none so closely resembles man
himself in his dual quality of body and soul as the telegraph. It too
has a body and soul. We see the wire and the electro-magnet, but not the
vital principle which animates it. Without its subtile, pulsating,
intangible spirit, it is but dead matter. But vitalized with its
immortal soul it assumes the quality of animated existence, and through
its agency thought is extended beyond the limitations of time and space,
and flashes through air and sea around the world. Its moving principle
flows more silently than a summer’s zephyr, and yet it rises at times to
an angry and deadly crash in the lightning stroke. At once powerful and
elusive, it remained for Professor Morse to capture this wild steed,
and, taming it, place it in the permanent service of man. On May 24,
1844, there went over the wires between Washington and Baltimore the
first message--“What hath God wrought?” This was both prayer and praise,
and no more lofty recognition of the divine power and beneficence could
have been made. It was indeed the work of God made manifest in the hands
of His children.

