Project Gutenberg's Nurse and Spy in the Union Army, by S. Emma E. Edmonds

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Nurse and Spy in the Union Army
       The Adventures and Experiences of a Woman in Hospitals,
       Camps, and Battle-Fields

Author: S. Emma E. Edmonds

Release Date: January 5, 2012 [EBook #38497]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


CHAPTER I.

    COMMENCEMENT OF THE WAR--MY HOME AND MY DUTY--I ENLIST IN THE
    CAUSE--EXCITEMENT AT THE WEST--TROOPS ON THE MARCH--MOBS AT
    BALTIMORE--TEMPORARY HOSPITALS--UNAVOIDABLE EVILS--BEGGING FOR
    COMFORTS--SUPPLIES FOR THE SICK--CAMP HOSPITALS--THUNDERS STORMS IN
    CAMP--A DYING OFFICER--SOLDIERS IN THE PUBLIC BUILDINGS--PREPARATIONS
    FOR THE ADVANCE.


Early in the spring of 1861, I was returning from the far West, and as I
sat waiting for the train which was to bear me to my adopted home in New
England, and was meditating upon the events which had transpired during
the past few months, the record of which was destined to blacken the fair
pages of American history, I was aroused from my reverie by a voice in the
street crying "New York Herald--Fall of Fort Sumter--President's
Proclamation--Call for seventy-five thousand men!" This announcement
startled me, while my imagination portrayed the coming struggle in all its
fearful magnitude. War, civil war, with all its horrors seemed inevitable,
and even then was ready to burst like a volcano upon the most happy and
prosperous nation the sun ever shone upon. The contemplation of this sad
picture filled my eyes with tears and my heart with sorrow.

It is true, I was not an American--I was not obliged to remain here during
this terrible strife--I could return to my native land where my parents
would welcome me to the home of my childhood, and my brothers and sisters
would rejoice at my coming. But these were not the thoughts which occupied
my mind. It was not my intention, or desire, to seek my own personal ease
and comfort while so much sorrow and distress filled the land. But the
great question to be decided, was, what can I do? What part am I to act in
this great drama? I was not able to decide for myself--so I carried this
question to the Throne of Grace, and found a satisfactory answer there.

Five years previous to the time of which I write, I left my rural home,
not far from the banks of the St. John's River, in the Province of New
Brunswick, and made my way to the United States. An insatiable thirst for
education led me to do this, for I believed then, as now, that the
"Foreign Missionary" field was the one in which I must labor, sooner or
later. I came here a stranger, with but little to recommend me to the
favorable notice of the good people, except a letter from the Pastor of
the church to which I belonged, and one from my
class-leader--notwithstanding, I found kind friends to help me in all my
undertakings, and whether in business, education, or spiritual
advancement, I have been assisted beyond my highest expectation. I thank
God that I am permitted in this hour of my adopted country's need to
express a tithe of the gratitude which I feel toward the people of the
Northern States.

Ten days after the President's proclamation was issued, I was ready to
start for Washington, having been employed by the Government, and
furnished with all the necessary equipments. I was not merely to go to
Washington and remain there until a battle had been fought and the wounded
brought in, and then in some comfortable hospital sit quietly and fan the
patients, after the Surgeon had dressed their wounds; but I was to go to
the front and participate in all the excitement of the battle scenes, or
in other words, be a "FIELD NURSE."

The great West was stirred to its center, and began to look like a vast
military camp. Recruiting offices were filled with men eager to enroll
their names as defenders of their country--and women were busily engaged
in preparing all the comforts that love and patriotism could suggest, for
those who were so soon to go forth to victory or to death, while the clash
of arms and strains of martial music almost drowned the hum of industry,
and war became the theme of every tongue.

About this time I witnessed the departure of the first western troops
which started for Washington. The regiments were drawn up in line--fully
equipped for their journey--with their bright bayonets flashing in the
morning sunlight. It was on the principal street of a pleasant little
village of about a thousand inhabitants, where there was scarcely a family
who had not a father, husband, son, or brother in that little band of
soldiers who stood there ready to bid them farewell, perhaps for
years--perhaps forever. A farewell address was delivered by the village
Pastor, and a new Testament presented to each soldier, with the following
inscription: "Put your trust in God--and keep your powder dry." Then came
the leave-taking--but it is too painful to dwell upon--the last fond word
was spoken, the last embrace given, then came the order "march"--and amid
the cheers of the citizens--with banners proudly floating, and the bands
playing "The Star Spangled Banner," they moved forward on their way to the
Capital. On looking back now upon the scenes of that morning,
notwithstanding I have looked upon others much more thrilling since then,
yet I cannot recall that hour without feelings of deep emotion. While I
stood there and beheld those manly forms convulsed with emotion, and heard
the sobs of those whom they were leaving behind, I could only thank God
that I was free and could go forward and work, and was not obliged to
stay at home and weep. A few hours more, and I, too, was on my way to
Washington.

When I reached Baltimore I found the city in an uproar--mobs were gathered
in the streets and the utmost excitement prevailed: and as the crowded
cars moved through the city toward the depot, the infuriated mob threw
showers of stones, brickbats, and other missiles, breaking the windows and
wounding some of the soldiers. Some of the men could not forbear firing
into the crowd--notwithstanding their orders were to the
contrary--however, it had a good effect, for the mob soon dispersed; they
probably had not forgotten the Sixth Massachusetts and the Pennsylvania
troops which had passed through a short time before. The cars soon reached
the depot, and started immediately for Washington--where we arrived in due
time--weary, and in great need of food and sleep.

Soon after reaching Washington I commenced visiting the temporary
hospitals which were prepared to receive the soldiers who arrived there
sick. The troops came pouring in so fast, and the weather being extremely
warm, all the general hospitals were soon filled, and it seemed impossible
to prepare suitable, or comfortable, accommodations for all who required
medical attention.

There are many things in connection with this war that we are disposed to
find fault with, and we think the blame rests upon such and such
individuals--but after investigating the matter, we find that they are all
owing to a combination of circumstances entirely beyond the control of
those individuals--and it requires time to bring about the desired
results. This has been my experience with regard to the hospital
department. After walking through the streets for hours on a sultry
southern day in search of one of those temporary hospitals, I would find a
number of men there delirious with fever--others had been sun-struck and
carried there--but no physician to be found in attendance. Then, I would
naturally come to the conclusion that the surgeons were all slack
concerning their duty--but upon going to the office of the Surgeon in
charge of that department, would find that a certain number of surgeons
were detailed every morning to visit those hospitals, and were faithfully
performing their duty; but that the number of hospitals and patients were
increasing so fast that it required all day to make the tour. Consequently
the last ones visited were obliged to wait and suffer--without any blame
attaching to the surgeons.

Then another great evil was to be remedied--there were thousands of sick
men to be taken care of--but for these the Government had made no
provision as regards more delicate kinds of food--nothing but hard bread,
coffee and pork, for sick and well, alike. The Sanitary Commission had not
yet come into operation and the consequence was our poor sick soldiers
suffered unspeakably from want of proper nourishment. I was speaking upon
this subject one day to Chaplain B. and his wife--my constant companions
in hospital labor--when Mrs. B. suggested that she and I should appeal to
the sympathies of the ladies of Washington and Georgetown, and try our
hand at begging. I agreed to the proposal at once, and wondered why I had
not thought of it myself--among all my schemes for alleviating the
sufferings of these men, it had never entered into my head to _beg_ for
them. We decided to go to Georgetown first and if we succeeded there, to
canvass Washington. So we started, and commenced operations by calling
first upon a clergyman's wife. We made inquiry there with regard to our
prospects of success, and the sentiments of the ladies generally upon the
war question, and finding that the majority were in our favor, we started
again quite hopefully--but not until the lady above mentioned had given us
an order on her grocer to the amount of five dollars. I gave Sister B. the
credit of that, for I had introduced her as the wife of the Rev. Mr. B.,
chaplain of the 7th. Then I suggested that we should separate for a few
hours--she to take one street and I another, so that we might sooner get
through the city. My next call was at a doctor's mansion, but I did not
find the lady at home; however, I learned that the doctor in question
kept a drug-store near by; she might be there; went, but found no lady;
thought fit to make my business known to the doctor, and the consequence
was, half a dozen bottles of blackberry wine and two of lemon syrup, with
a cordial invitation to call again. So prospered our mission throughout
the day, and at the close of it we had a sufficient supply of groceries,
brandy, ice, jellies, etc., to fill our little ambulance; and oh, what a
change those little delicacies wrought upon our poor sick boys. We were
encouraged by that day's work, to continue our efforts in that direction,
and finally made Dr. W.'s store a depot for the donations of those kind
friends who wished to assist us in restoring to health the defenders of
our beloved country.

Typhoid fever began to make its appearance in camp, as the burning sun of
June came pouring down upon us, and the hospitals were soon crowded with
its victims. It was then that my labors began in earnest, and as I went
from tent to tent, ministering to the wants of those delirious, helpless
men, I wondered if there ever was a "Missionary Field" which promised a
richer harvest, than the one in which I was already engaged; and oh, how
thankful I was that it was my privilege to take some small part in so
great a work.

I shall notice, briefly, the manner in which the hospitals are conducted
in camp. There are large tents furnished for hospital purposes, which
will accommodate from twenty to twenty-five men. These tents are usually
put up in the most pleasant and shady part of the camp; the inside is
nicely leveled, and board floors laid, if boards can be procured, if not,
rubber blankets are laid down instead. Sometimes there are straw ticks and
cot bedsteads furnished, but not in sufficient quantity to supply all the
hospitals. Along each side of the tent the sick are laid, on blankets or
cots, leaving room to pass between the beds. In the center of the tent
stands a temporary board table, on which are kept books, medicines, et
cetera. The hospital corps consists of a surgeon, an assistant surgeon, a
hospital steward, a ward-master, four nurses, two cooks, and a man of all
work to carry water, cut wood, and make himself generally useful. The
immediate care of the sick devolves upon those four nurses, who are
generally detailed from the ranks, each one being on duty six hours
without intermission. The surgeons visit the patients twice every day,
oftener if required; the prescriptions are filled by the hospital steward,
and the medicine is administered by the nurses. The nurses are usually
very kind to the sick, and when off duty in the hospital, spend much of
their time in digging drains around the tents, planting evergreens, and
putting up awnings, all of which add much to the coolness and comfort of
the hospital. Draining the grounds is a very important part of hospital
duty, for when those terrible thunder-storms come, which are so frequent
in the south, it is morally impossible to keep the tent floors from being
flooded, unless there are drains all around the tents. Great excitement
prevails in camp during those tempests--the rain comes down in torrents,
while the wind blows a hurricane--lifting the tents from the ground, and
throwing everything into wild confusion. I have seen a dozen men stand for
hours around one hospital, holding down the ropes and tent poles to
prevent the sick from being exposed to the raging elements.

In one of those storms, I saw a tent blown down, in which one of our
officers lay suffering from typhoid fever. We did our best to keep him dry
until a stretcher could be procured, but all in vain. Notwithstanding we
wrapped him in rubber blankets and shawls, yet the rain penetrated them
all, and by the time he was carried to a house, a quarter of a mile
distant, he was completely drenched. He was a noble fellow and I love to
speak of him. Mrs. B. and I remained with him alternately until he died,
which was five days from that time. We sent for his wife, who arrived just
in time to see him die. He was unconscious when she came, and we were
standing around his cot watching every shadow which the sable wing of
advancing death cast upon his features, and eagerly looking for a single
ray of returning reason. He looked up suddenly, and seeing his wife
standing weeping, he beckoned her to come to him. Kneeling beside him, she
bent her ear close to the lips of the dying man. He whispered distinctly,
"I am going--the way is bright, don't weep--farewell!" A little later he
was asked, "What is the foundation of your hope of Heaven?" His face was
calm and beautiful in its expression, and his splendid dark eyes lit up
with holy confidence and trust, as he replied, "Christ--Christ!" These
were his last words. Glorious words for a dying soldier. He lingered a few
hours, and then quietly and peacefully breathed out his life. So passed
away one of the most exemplary men it has ever been my lot to meet, either
in the army or elsewhere. The same day, the sorrowing widow, with the
remains of her beloved and noble husband, started for her northern home;
and that christian patriot now sleeps in a beautiful little cemetery near
the city of Detroit, Michigan, having rendered up his life a willing
sacrifice for his country.

Mrs. B. was desirous of visiting some of the public buildings in
Washington and wished me to accompany her. I did so, but found that it was
almost impossible to get along through the crowded streets. The gallant
troops were coming in by thousands from every loyal State in the Union.
The Capitol and White House were common places of resort for soldiers.
Arms were stacked in the rotunda of the one and the lobbies of the other,
while our "noble boys in blue" lounged in the cushioned seats of members
of Congress, or reclined in easy chairs in the President's Mansion.

Camps of instruction were prepared near the city, while every hillside and
valley for miles around was thickly dotted with snow white tents. Soldiers
drilling, fatigue parties building forts, artillery practicing, and the
supply trains moving to and from the various headquarters, presented a
picture deeply interesting. As I rode from camp to camp and contemplated
that immense army concentrating its force on the banks of the Potomac, and
saw with what zeal and enthusiasm the soldiers entered upon their duties,
I could but feel assured of the speedy termination of the conflict, and
look forward with eager anticipation to the day when that mighty host
would advance upon the enemy, and like an overwhelming torrent sweep
rebellion from the land.




CHAPTER II.

    MARCHING ORDERS--REMOVAL OF THE SICK--A YOUNG PATIENT--VISIT FROM HIS
    MOTHER--MARCH TOWARD MANASSAS--COLLECTING SUPPLIES--FATIGUES OF THE
    MARCH--PREPARATIONS FOR BATTLE--A CAMP PRAYER MEETING--DIVISIONS
    DETAILED--MY PLACE ON THE FIELD--"RATHER CLOSE QUARTERS"--A BATTLE
    SUNDAY--SKULKING FROM THE FIELD.


Marching orders received to-day--two days more, and the Army of the
Potomac will be on its way to Bull Run. I find this registered in my
journal July 15th, 1861, without any comment whatever. But I do not
require a journal to refresh my memory with regard to the events of those
two days of preparation which followed their announcement. The Army of the
Potomac was soon to meet the enemy for the first time--a great battle was
to be fought. Oh, what excitement and enthusiasm that order
produced--nothing could be heard but the wild cheering of the men, as
regiment after regiment received their orders. The possibility of a defeat
never seemed to enter the mind of any. All the sick in camp now were to be
sent to Washington, clothes changed, knapsacks packed, letters written
home, packages sent to the express office, etc. After all was done,
everything in readiness, and the sick men tenderly laid in the ambulances,
Mrs. B. said: "Now let us go to every ambulance and bid the boys
good-bye." As we passed along from one ambulance to another, speaking
words of encouragement to each soldier, many a tear would start from
grateful eyes, and many a feeble voice uttered an earnest "God bless you,"
while others would draw from their bosoms some cherished relic, and give
as a token of remembrance. Oh how hard it was to part with those men, with
whom we had watched so many weary days and nights--we felt that they had,
truly, "become endeared to us through suffering."

There was one patient, however, we did not put into an ambulance, and who
was a great source of anxiety to us. He lay there upon a stretcher close
by, waiting to be carried to a house not far distant. He was young, not
seventeen, with clear blue eyes, curly auburn hair, and a broad, white
brow; his mother's pride, and an only son. Two weeks previously he had
been attacked with typhoid fever. The surgeon said, "You may do all you
can for him, but it is a hopeless case." Mrs. B. had devoted most of her
time to him and I was often called to assist her. He was delirious and
became quite unmanageable at times, and it required all the strength we
possessed to keep him in bed; but now the delirium of fever had passed
away and he was helpless as an infant. We had written for his mother to
come if possible, and had just received a letter from her, stating that
she was on her way to Washington; but would she come before we were
obliged to leave? Oh, we hoped so, and were anxiously looking for her.

The ambulances started with their freight of emaciated, suffering men.
Slowly that long train wound its way toward the city looking like a great
funeral procession, and sadly we turned to our remaining patient, who was
deeply affected at the removal of his comrades. He was then carried to the
house above mentioned and a nurse left to take care of him, while we were
obliged to prepare for our own comfort on the long weary march which was
so near at hand. We had just commenced to pack our saddle-bags, when we
heard an unusual noise, as of some one crying piteously, and going out to
learn the cause of the excitement, whom should we find but the mother of
our handsome blue-eyed patient. She had called at the surgeon's tent to
inquire for her son, and he had told her that all the sick had been sent
to Washington, he having forgotten for the moment, the exception with
regard to her son. The first words I heard were spoken in the most
touching manner--"Oh, why did you send away my boy? I wrote you I was
coming; Oh, why did you send him away!"

I shall never forget the expression of that mother's face as she stood
there wringing her hands and repeating the question. We very soon
rectified the mistake which the surgeon had made, and in a few moments she
was kneeling by the bedside of her darling boy, and we returned rejoicing
that it had been our privilege to "deliver him to his mother." Oh, how
many, who come to Washington in search of loved ones, are caused
unnecessary pain, yes, weeks of torturing suspense and fruitless search,
in consequence of some little mistake on the part of a surgeon, a nurse,
or some person who is supposed to know just where the sought for are to be
found.

The 17th of July dawned bright and clear, and everything being in
readiness, the Army of the Potomac took up its line of march for Manassas.
In gay spirits the army moved forward, the air resounding with the music
of the regimental bands, and patriotic songs of the soldiers. No gloomy
forebodings seemed to damp the spirits of the men, for a moment, but "On
to Richmond," was echoed and re-echoed, as that vast army moved rapidly
over the country. I felt strangely out of harmony with the wild, joyous
spirit which pervaded the troops. As I rode slowly along, watching those
long lines of bayonets as they gleamed and flashed in the sunlight, I
thought that many, very many, of those enthusiastic men who appeared so
eager to meet the enemy, would never return to relate the success or
defeat of that splendid army. Even if victory should perch upon their
banners, and I had no doubt it would, yet many noble lives must be
sacrificed ere it could be obtained.

The main column reached Fairfax toward evening and encamped for the night.
Col. R.'s wife of the Second ----, Mrs. B. and myself were, I think, the
only three females who reached Fairfax that night. The day had been
extremely hot, and not being accustomed to ride all day beneath a burning
sun, we felt its effects very sensibly, and consequently, hailed with joy
the order to encamp for the night. Notwithstanding the heat and fatigue of
the day's march, the troops were in high spirits, and immediately began
preparing supper. Some built fires while others went in search of, and
appropriated, every available article which might in any way add to the
comfort of hungry and fatigued men.

The whole neighborhood was ransacked for milk, butter, eggs, poultry, etc.
which were found insufficient in quantity to supply the wants of such a
multitude. There might have been heard some stray shots fired in the
direction of a field where a drove of cattle were quietly grazing; and
soon after the odor of fresh steak was issuing from every part of the
camp. I wish to state, however, that all "raids" made upon hen-coops, etc.
were contrary to the orders of the General in command, for during the day
I had seen men put under arrest for shooting chickens by the roadside.

I was amused to hear the answer of a hopeful young darkey cook, when
interrogated with regard to the broiled chickens and beef steak which he
brought on for supper. Col. R. demanded, in a very stern voice, "Jack,
where did you get that beef steak and those chickens?" "Massa, I'se
carried dem cl'ar from Washington; thought I'd cook 'em 'fore dey
sp'il'd"; and then added, with a broad grin, "I aint no thief, I aint."
Col. R. replied: "That will do, Jack, you can go now." Then the Colonel
told us how he had seen Jack running out of a house, as he rode along, and
a woman ran out calling after him with all her might, but Jack never
looked behind him, but escaped as fast as he could, and was soon out of
sight. Said he, "I thought the young rascal had been up to some mischief,
so I rode up and asked the woman what was the matter, and found he had
stolen all her chickens; I asked her how much they were worth; she
"reckoned" about two dollars. I think she made a pretty good hit, for
after I paid her, she told me she had had only two chickens." Supper being
over, pickets posted, and camp guards detailed, all became quiet for the
night.

Early the next morning the reveille beat, the whole camp was soon in
motion, and after a slight breakfast from our haversacks the march was
resumed. The day was very hot, and we found great difficulty in obtaining
water, the want of which caused the troops much suffering. Many of the
men were sun-struck, and others began to drop out of the ranks from
exhaustion. All such as were not able to march were put into ambulances
and sent back to Washington. Toward noon, the tedium of the march began to
be enlivened by sharp volleys of musketry, in the direction of the advance
guard; but those alarms were only occasioned by our skirmishers, pouring a
volley into everything which looked as if it might contain a masked
battery, or a band of the enemy's sharpshooters.

Considerable excitement prevailed throughout the day, as we were every
hour in expectation of meeting the enemy. Carefully feeling its way,
however, the army moved steadily on, investigating every field, building,
and ravine, for miles in front and to the right and left, until it reached
Centerville, where we halted for the night.

The troops now began to feel the effects of the march, and there was
evidently a lack of that pic-nic hilarity which had characterized them the
day before. Several regiments had been supplied with new shoes the day
before leaving camp, and they found by sad experience, that they were not
the most comfortable things to march in, as their poor blistered feet
testified; in many cases their feet were literally raw, the thick woolen
stockings having chafed the skin off. Mrs. B. and I, having provided
ourselves before leaving camp, with a quantity of linen, bandages, lint,
ointment, etc. found it very convenient now, even before a shot had been
fired by the enemy.

Our surgeons began to prepare for the coming battle, by appropriating
several buildings and fitting them up for the wounded--among others the
stone church at Centerville--a church which many a soldier will remember,
as long as memory lasts. Late that evening as I was returning from this
church, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. B., I proposed that we should walk
through the entire camp to see how the boys were employed, on this, the
eve of their first battle. We found many engaged in writing by the
glimmering light of the camp-fire--soldiers always carry writing materials
on a march; some were reading their bibles, perhaps with more than usual
interest; while others sat in groups, conversing in low earnest tones; but
the great mass were stretched upon the ground, wrapped in their blankets,
fast asleep, and all unconscious of the dangers of the morrow.

We were about to return to our quarters in a log cabin built by the rebel
soldiers, and which had been evacuated only a few days previous, when we
heard several voices singing in a little grove not far from camp. We
turned and walked toward the grove, until we could hear distinctly, the
words of the following beautiful hymn:

  "O, for a faith that will not shrink,
    Though press'd by every foe,
  That will not tremble on the brink
    Of any earthly woe;

  That will not murmur or complain
    Beneath the chastening rod,
  But, in the hour of grief and pain,
    Will lean upon its God;

  A faith that shines more bright and clear
    When tempests rage without;
  That, when in danger, knows no fear,
    In darkness knows no doubt."

"Ah!" exclaimed Mr. B., "I recognize Willie L.'s voice there. I understand
now; this is Willie's prayer meeting night, and notwithstanding the
fatigue of the march and blistered feet, he has not forgotten it." We drew
nearer to listen to and enjoy the exercises unperceived, for no sooner had
the last words of the hymn died away on the still midnight air, than
Willie's clear voice rose in prayer, filling the grove with its rich,
pathetic tones. He prayed for victory on the morrow, for his comrades, for
loved ones at home, and his voice grew tremulous with emotion, as he plead
with the Saviour to comfort and support his widowed mother, if he should
fall in battle.

Then followed a practical talk about being faithful soldiers of Jesus, as
well as of their beloved country; of the necessity of being prepared at
any moment, to lay down the cross and take up the crown. One after another
prayed and spoke, until about a dozen--and that included the whole number
present--had addressed the Throne of Grace, and testified to the power of
the Gospel of Christ in the salvation of sinners. No one was called upon
to pray or speak, no one said he had nothing to say and then talked long
enough to prove it, no one excused his inability to interest his brethren,
and no time was lost by delay, but every one did his duty, and did it
promptly. We retired feeling refreshed and encouraged.

After ascertaining the position of the enemy, Gen. McDowell ordered
forward three divisions, commanded by Heintzelman, Hunter and Tyler, Miles
being left in reserve at Centerville. Sunday morning before dawn, those
three divisions moved forward, presenting a magnificent spectacle, as
column after column wound its way over the green hills and through the
hazy valleys, with the soft moonlight falling on the long lines of shining
steel. Not a drum or bugle was heard during the march, and the deep
silence was only broken by the rumbling of artillery, the muffled tread of
infantry, or the low hum of thousands of subdued voices.

The divisions separated where three roads branch off toward Bull Run, each
taking the road leading to its respective position. Soon the morning broke
bright and clear, bringing the two contending armies in plain sight of
each other. The enemy was posted on heights that rose in regular slopes
from the shore crowned here and there by earthworks. The woods that
interfered with his cannon ranges had all been cut away, and his guns had
a clean sweep of every approach. On our side the descent was more
gradual, and covered with a dense forest. The roar of artillery soon
announced that the battle had actually commenced.

Mrs. B. and myself took our position on the field, according to orders, in
connection with Gen. Heintzelman's division, having delivered our horses
to Jack for safe keeping, with strict orders to remain where he was, for
we might require them at any moment. I imagine now, I see Mrs. B., as she
stood there, looking as brave as possible, with her narrow brimmed leghorn
hat, black cloth riding habit, shortened to walking length by the use of a
page, a silver-mounted seven-shooter in her belt, a canteen of water swung
over one shoulder and a flask of brandy over the other, and a haversack
with provision, lint, bandages, adhesive plaster, etc. hanging by her
side. She was tall and slender, with dark brown hair, pale face, and blue
eyes.

Chaplain B. sat upon his horse looking as solemn as if standing face to
face with the angel of death. The first man I saw killed was a gunner
belonging to Col. R.'s command. A shell had burst in the midst of the
battery, killing one and wounding three men and two horses. Mr. B. jumped
from his horse, hitched it to a tree, and ran forward to the battery; Mrs.
B. and I following his example as fast as we could. I stooped over one of
the wounded, who lay upon his face weltering in his blood; I raised his
head, and who should it be but Willie L. He was mortally wounded in the
breast, and the tide of life was fast ebbing away; the stretchers were
soon brought, and he was carried from the field.

Seeing the disaster from a distance, Col. R. rode up to the battery, and
as he was engaged in giving orders, a solid shot came whizzing by in such
close proximity to his head, that it stunned him for a moment; but soon
recovering, he turned up the side of his head and shrugged his shoulders,
a peculiarity of his, and in his usual nasal twang, said, "rather close
quarters," and rode away, apparently as unconcerned as if it had been a
humming bird which crossed his path. But not content with admonishing the
Colonel, the same shot struck my poor little flask of brandy which lay
near me on a drum-head, shattering it as spitefully as if sent by the
combined force of the Order of "Good Templars."

Now the battle began to rage with terrible fury. Nothing could be heard
save the thunder of artillery, the clash of steel, and the continuous roar
of musketry. Oh, what a scene for the bright sun of a holy Sabbath morning
to shine upon! Instead of the sweet influences which we associate with the
Sabbath--the chiming of church bells calling us to the house of prayer,
the Sabbath school, and all the solemn duties of the sanctuary, there was
confusion, destruction and death. There was no place of safety for miles
around; the safest place was the post of duty. Many that day who turned
their backs upon the enemy and sought refuge in the woods some two miles
distant, were found torn to pieces by shell, or mangled by cannon ball--a
proper reward for those who, insensible to shame, duty, or patriotism,
desert their cause and comrades in the trying hour of battle, and skulk
away cringing under the fear of death.




