The Project Gutenberg EBook of Love, by Bernard Simon Talmey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Love
       A Treatise on the Science of Sex-attraction, for the use
       of Physicians and Students of Medical Jurisprudence

Author: Bernard Simon Talmey

Release Date: September 22, 2016 [EBook #53121]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



Like the protozoon, the ovum, immediately after its impregnation,
begins to undergo a certain division, by a series of successive
segmentations, into 2, then 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, etc., cells. By
continuous cell segmentations a great mass, the morula or mulberry,
is produced. The structure of the morula corresponds with that of the
coelenterata, or the animals of the second type. To this type belong
the animals with gemmiparous reproduction, or multiplication by means
of buds. The divided animals remain together and form colonies, as e.
g. in sponges or corals.

The next event in the formation of the embryo is the blastula. The
solid spherical mass of cells becomes hollow like a rubber ball. In
the subsequent stage the blastula becomes flat at one pole. By degrees
a depression is formed at this point, which becomes deeper step by
step, until the inner layer reaches the outer layer, representing half
a sphere of two layers, like a collapsed rubber ball. In the farther
growth the edges approach the middle line till they finally meet and
fuse together. The oval body, called the gastrula, thus consists of two
layers, the primitive germinal membranes, the ectoderm and entoderm.
The gastrula resembles in its structure that of the worms, or the third
type of the animal kingdom.

 [Illustration: CUT II.

 _Diagram, showing the development of the organs._

 ek, ektoderm; mp, medulary plate; ms, mesoderm just forming from the
 ed, entoderm; c, coelom or body cavity; nt, nerve-tube or spinal cord;
 ac, abdominal cavity; cd, chorda dorsalis; it, intestinal cavity.]

By certain foldings of the ento- and ectoderm transformations arise, and
new organs develop. Two folds of the entoderm grow higher, approach
each other and finally meet. In this way the embryo consists of four
germinal membranes. A certain folding of the ectoderm marks the
position of the future backbone in the primitive stripe. A longitudinal
furrow marks the origin of the nerve-tube. The different membranes
have thus formed several tubes, the chorda dorsalis, the definitive
intestinal canal and the abdominal cavity or coelom. The structure of
the embryo resembles now more or less that of the animals of the fourth
type or the echinodermata.

The membranes which include the intestinal canal soon overgrow on both
sides the nerve-tube and the chorda and are then differentiated partly
into the bones of the skeleton and partly into the muscles. In the
meantime, the vascular spaces develop. At one point of the vascular
tube a rhythmical pulsation is observed, representing the primitive
heart, similar to that of the mollusca.

A certain fold, the head-fold, arises at the front end of the embryo
by the bending of the spinal column. Beneath the head-fold arise five
processes or gills, as in fishes, which later on are transformed into
the face of the fetus. Four other processes are budded off from the
trunk and subsequently become the extremities. A furrow at the ventral
side of the embryo shows the origin of later trachea and lungs. On
both sides of the head-fold can be seen two pits for the eyes. At
this point, the embryo is in the same stage of development as many
arthropoda.

The skeleton begins now to ossify. The heart tube begins to bend and
takes the form of an “S.” In this way the tube is turned into an
auricle and ventricle as in the amphibia. The ventricle is then divided
by a partition as in the reptiles. One part of the nerve-tube is
differentiated into three cerebral vesicles, as in birds.

Thus the embryo resembles in its structure at different stages the
structure of the different types of the animals of the animal kingdom.
The different formations do not follow the chronological order as
described, but, as a rule, they take place synchronously. At the end of
the fourth month the fetus is about sixteen centimeters or six inches
long and has reached its definite human shape.




CHAPTER II

EVOLUTION OF THE GENITAL SYSTEM


_A. The Indifferent Stage_

Before the last described stage has been reached, there has developed
simultaneously with the other organs a set of organs, known under the
name of the genito-urinary system, which deserves here our special
attention.

The urinary secretion is effected throughout the animal kingdom by
three systems: the pronephros or the head-kidney; mesonephros, or
primitive kidney, or Wolffian body, “Urniere”; and metanephros, or true
kidney. The pronephros must be regarded as the phylogenetically oldest
part, since only traces of it are found in the human embryo. Here in
the earlier stages of embryonic development, the Wolffian body is the
organ for the urinary secretion.

The Wolffian body, or mesonephros, appears in the shape of two
longitudinal protuberances on either side of the mesentary along the
spinal column. The protuberances consist of a series of transverse
excretory tubules or nephrides. These tubules open into two pronephric
ducts, or Wolffian ducts, which are running alongside the abdominal
aorta. These two Wolffian or primitive male ducts open at the caudal
end of the embryo into the hind-end of the alimentary canal, or the
cloaca (Cut III, Fig. 2).

When the Wolffian body has almost reached its greatest development a
second longitudinal duct makes its appearance by the evagination of
the ventral surface of the Wolffian body. These ducts lie in close
proximity of the Wolffian ducts, along the dorsal aspect of the coelom,
or body-cavity, and are known as the ducts of Müller, or the primitive
female ducts. The function of these canals in lowly organized animals
is that of receiving from the body-cavity the ova and of evacuating
them from the body. The Müllerian ducts also open into the cloaca. At
the lower end the Müllerian and Wolffian ducts run in close apposition
and form the genital cord. At this stage of development the embryo is
thus hermaphroditic like the worms.

 [Illustration: CUT III.

 _Fig. 1, horizontal cut through embryo; Fig. 2, vertical cut; schema
 of indifferent stage._

 Wb, Wolffian body; Wd, Wolffian duct; Md, Müllerian duct; gg, genital
 gland; m, mesentery; i, intestine; sc, spinal cord; ch, chorda; ao,
 aorta; a, allantois; clo, cloaca; k, kidney.]

The metanephros, or the true kidney, appears first as an epithelial
or renal evagination of the Wolffian duct on the dorsal side of the
latter and near its opening into the intestinal canal or cloaca.
This bud grows forward, extends headward toward the position of the
Wolffian body and becomes a long, narrow tube, the ureter. The blind
end branches into different tubules, each having a sacculated end. They
soon assume a tortuous and convoluted form and represent the permanent
kidney. The Wolffian body is now replaced in its function by the true
kidney, and enters into special relations with the sexual organs, by
being transformed into the genital apparatus of the male.

Before the Wolffian body has yet degenerated the mesothelial cells
overlying the free surface of that body, at its upper part, and at the
ventro-mesial side, assume a high columnar form and form an elongated
swelling, known as the internal genital ridge. As the degeneration of
the Wolffian body proceeds the genital ridge is differentiated into the
indifferent sexual gland, by producing a projection upon the wall of
the coelom or body cavity. This prominence is attached to the surface
of the Wolffian body by a fold of the peritoneum. At this stage there
is no distinction of sex. The sexual gland represents the indifferent
type of the sexual apparatus.

While this metamorphosis is going on at the head-end of the sexual
ducts, the caudal ends undergo also a certain degree of development.

In the early embryonic life the intestinal canal is in communication
with the allantois. In fact, both form one continuous canal. When
the caudal, pointed end of the intestine becomes obliterated,
the allantois-duct on the ventral side, and the intestine on the
dorsal side, both open into a kind of pouch, the cloaca. When the
body-cavity of the embryo closes in the course of farther development,
the allantois, which is the connecting link between the embryo and
the placenta, enters the embryo by the small opening known as the
umbilicus. Very soon the middle segment of the intra-embryonic
allantois dilates and assumes the form of a spindle-shaped sac, the
later urinary bladder. The portion of the intra-embryonic allantois,
connecting the summit of the bladder with the umbilicus, soon becomes
an impervious cord, known as the urachus. The portion of the allantois
intervening between the bladder and the intestine is designated as
Sinus Urogenitalis.

Into this sinus opens the short canal, connecting the lower end of
the bladder with the upper end of the urogenital sinus which becomes
later on the urethra. The sinus also receives the genital ducts, the
Müllerian and the Wolffian ducts, and the latter’s evaginations, the
ureters. Later on, owing to alterations through unequal growth, the
orifices of the ureters, which originally lie in close apposition with
the openings of the Wolffian ducts, change their position and are moved
toward the bladder. The interval between the two pairs of ducts, the
Wolffian ducts and the ureters, increases, until the ureters finally
open into the bladder.

The intra-embryonic allantois has thus furnished the following organs:
the solid cord urachus, or ligamentum vesico-umbilicale, the urinary
bladder, the urethra and the urogenital sinus. The latter is still in
communication with the intestine by means of the cloaca.

At the next step ridges or folds spring from each side of the cloaca,
grow toward each other, until they finally coalesce and form a complete
septum. By farther development the original epithelial septum becomes
the permanent perineum. Since the intestine is now no longer in
communication with the urogenital sinus, the cloaca as such disappears.
At this stage the intestine ends in a blind sac. It is closed up
towards the exterior by the anal membrane. Neither are urethra and
genital canal in communication with the exterior. They both open into
the urogenital sinus, and the latter is closed up towards the exterior
by the urogenital membrane. The anal membrane soon breaks through and
the rectum opens to the exterior by the way of the anus.


_B. The Internal Male Sexual Organs_

After the genital ridge had made its appearance, columns of cells
begin to grow down into the substance of the Wolffian ridge. The
columns are composed of two kinds of cells, small epithelial cells
and large spherical cells, known as sex-cells. Two regions may be now
recognized in the ridge, the rete-region and the sex-gland region. The
cell-columns of the rete region are termed “rete-cords,” and the cell
columns of the sex-gland region are called “sex-cords.” The sex-cords
unite to form a complicated network and the rete-cords grow backward to
the Wolffian ridge. They then develop a lumen and send off branches to
the sex-cord reticulum.

The genital portion of the Wolffian body persists in the male in its
entirety and serves as the efferent ducts of the testis. They open into
the upper part of the Wolffian duct. The latter is retained complete.
The portion nearest the testis is thrown into coils and forms a part of
the epididymis, the remainder is converted into the vas deferens and
the ductus ejaculatorius and the lateral outpouching of the wall, the
vesicula seminalis.

The Müllerian ducts disappear completely in the male. Only the lower
ends of the ducts fuse to form the sinus pocularis, or utriculus
prostaticus.


_C. The Internal Female Sex Organs_

In the female the Wolffian body and ducts degenerate. The remainder
of the body is known as the parovarium, an organ without any apparent
function, while the remainder of the ducts are designated the ducts of
Gartner.

The ovary is produced from the asexual stage by the following
metamorphosis. The mesothelial cells on the peritoneal surface of the
sexual gland change into the germinal epithelium and form the so-called
egg-columns or sexual cord which represent the primitive ova.

 [Illustration:

 CUT IV.

 _Vertical cut through male and female embryos, Schema; Fig. 1, male;
 Fig. 2, female._

 a, allantois duct; b, bladder; u, urethra; ur, ureter; su, sinus
 urogenitalis; sp, sinus pocularis; cd, cloacal depression; ad, anal
 depression; t, testicle; hy, hyatide; e, epididymis; vd, vas deferens;
 Md, Müllerian duct; de, ductus ejaculatorius; k, kidney; i, intestine;
 va, vagina; ov, ovary; pa, parovarium; Ft, Fallopian tube; Wd,
 Wolffian duct; ut, uterus.]

At the caudal end, the Müllerian ducts fuse together into one, the
walls, along the entire line of the union, degenerate, and the two
ducts thus form a single duct, the later vagina and uterus. Until
the fifth month there is no distinction between vagina and uterus,
the two organs form a single sac-like structure. At the beginning of
the fifth month, a circular ridge in the wall of the sac makes its
appearance and marks the division between the vagina and the uterus.
When the lower portion of the two Müllerian ducts have fused to form a
single canal, the utero-vaginal sac, the lumen of the vagina is still
obliterated, being filled with epithelial cells. By the breaking down
of the central epithelial cells, the cavity is established.

At this period a little semicircular crescentic fold attached to the
dorsal margin of the aperture of the vagina arises and forms the hymen,
an organ which has always played such an important rôle in the fancy of
all nations.

The upper blind ends of the Müllerian ducts, with their expanded
funnel-shaped mouths, diverge and form the oviducts, or the Fallopian
tubes.


_D. The External Genitals_

At the time when the urethra, the sexual ducts and the intestine
still open into the sac-like tube, the so-called cloaca, there is
distinguishable on the exterior surface of the body, corresponding to
the position of the cloaca, a certain depression called the cloacal
depression. When the intestine is separated from the cloaca by the
septum, the later perineum, the exterior cloacal depression is cut into
two, the anal and the urogenital depressions. Between the urogenital
depression, later called the genital groove, exteriorly and the
urogenital sinus interiorly, there is only a dividing membrane, the
urogenital membrane which later on breaks through and transforms the
entire sinus into a shallow depression, termed the vestibule.

 [Illustration: CUT V.

 _Six stages of the development of the external genitals. Fig. 1 and 2,
 two in different stages; m and M, two male stages, f and F, two female
 stages after O. Hertwig._

 pl, posterior limbs; clo, cloacal depression; gt, genital tubercle;
 gs, genital swelling; gf, genital fold; gg, genital groove; gp, glans
 penis; p, perineum; a, anus; pr, prepuce; sc, scrotum; r, raphe; cl,
 clitoris; su, entrance to sinus urogenitalis; lm, labia majora; ny,
 nymphæ; vv, vestibule of vagina.]

Before the urogenital sinus has opened to the exterior the mesenchym
surrounding the urogenital depression exteriorly begins to thicken and
produces an encircling elevation, the genital swelling. On the ventral
side within this swelling appears a projection, the genital tubercle,
which is thus surrounded by the genital swelling. The tubercle soon
increases in size, so that the urogenital depression, now called the
genital groove, becomes partly situated at its under aspect (Cut 5,
Fig. 2). The lips of this genital groove thicken and form the two
genital folds. All these four organs are common in both sexes and
represent the asexual or bisexual state of the external genital organs.


_E. The Male External Genitals_

In the male the genital tubercle increases enormously in size to form
the penis. Its extremity becomes bulbously enlarged and forms the glans
penis. The lips of the groove or rather of the vestibule, since by this
time the urogenital membrane had broken through and had transformed the
sinus urogenitalis into the vestibule, the so-called genital folds,
meet together and fuse, thus converting the vestibule and the groove
into the terminal portion of the male urethra and bringing it about,
that the ductus ejaculatorii and the sinus pocularis open upon the
floor of that passage. The prostate, consisting of several independent
glands, has also its openings at this point. In its development the
prostate belongs to the urethra as well as to the sinus urogenitalis.
The two genital swellings are brought closer together in the male and
form the scrotum, a sac containing two separate pouches into which the
testes descend.


_F. The Female External Genitals_

In the female the vestibule, or the shallow depression which was formed
through the breaking through of the urogenital membrane, remains open
throughout life, and is termed the vestibule of the vulva. From the
sides of the lower part of the sinus a pair of evaginations are formed
and give rise to the Bartholinian glands. The vestibule being in fact
the open sinus urogenitalis, the urethra and the vagina naturally have
their orifices in the same.

The genital tubercle ceases to grow in the female and becomes the
clitoris. The genital folds or the lips of the vestibule become
prolonged and form the labia minora or the nymphae. The genital
swelling increases in size through adipose and fibrous tissue. The part
situated on the ventral side of the clitoris becomes the mons veneris,
while the lateral parts are converted into the labia majora of the
vulva.




                               PART III.

                                ANATOMY




CHAPTER III

THE MALE GENITALS


The knowledge of the anatomy of the genitals, of the mechanism of
erection and ejaculation, and the nervous centres which preside
over these functions, is essential for a clear comprehension of
sex-attraction in men and in women. It will, therefore, be of some
profit even to medical men briefly to recall to memory those parts of
the human anatomy which have a particular bearing upon the subject of
this treatise.

_Scrotum._—The main generative glands in the male, the testicles, are
situated within a bag, the so-called scrotum, outside of the abdominal
cavity. This bag or pouch, hanging between the thighs, below the
symphysis, consists of two compartments which are separated by the
septum scroti. The scrotum may be considered as a diverticle of the
anterior abdominal wall. Before the descent of the testicles from the
abdominal cavity, two diverticles of the abdominal wall are formed,
at two points anteriorly to the genital swelling, where later on the
inguinal canals are found. The diverticles extend to the swelling and
coalesce to form the bag. The raphe, or last, at the point of their
union, can be observed through the entire life of the individual. This
median raphe runs from the perineum to the penis, indicating the inner
division of the scrotum.

