The Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Natural Faculties, by Galen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On the Natural Faculties

Author: Galen

Translator: Arthur John Brock

Release Date: August 2, 2013 [EBook #43383]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



If the work of Hippocrates be taken as representing the foundation
upon which the edifice of historical Greek medicine was reared, then
the work of Galen, who lived some six hundred years later, may be
looked upon as the summit or apex of the same edifice. Galen’s merit
is to have crystallised or brought to a focus all the best work of the
Greek medical schools which had preceded his own time. It is
essentially in the form of Galenism that Greek medicine was
transmitted to after ages.

[Sidenote: The Beginnings of Medicine in Greece.]

The ancient Greeks referred the origins of medicine to a god Asklepios
(called in Latin Aesculapius), thereby testifying to their
appreciation of the truly divine function of the healing art. The
emblem of Aesculapius, familiar in medical symbolism at the present
day, was a staff with a serpent coiled round it, the animal typifying
wisdom in general, and more particularly the wisdom of the
medicine-man, with his semi-miraculous powers over life and death.

“_Be ye therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves._”

[Sidenote: The Asclepiea or Health-Temples.]

The temples of Aesculapius were scattered over the ancient Hellenic
world. To them the sick and ailing resorted in crowds. The treatment,
which was in the hands of an hereditary priesthood, combined the best
of the methods carried on at our present-day health-resorts, our
hydropathics, sanatoriums, and nursing-homes. Fresh air, water-cures,
massage, gymnastics, psychotherapy, and natural methods in general
were chiefly relied on.

[Sidenote: Hippocrates and the Unity of the Organism.]

Hippocrates, the “Father of Medicine” (5th to 4th centuries, B.C.) was
associated with the Asclepieum of Cos, an island off the south-west
coast of Asia Minor, near Rhodes. He apparently revitalized the work
of the health-temples, which had before his time been showing a
certain decline in vigour, coupled with a corresponding excessive
tendency towards sophistry and priestcraft.

Celsus says: “_Hippocrates Cous primus quidem ex omnibus memoria
dignis ab studio sapientiae disciplinam hanc separavit._” He means
that Hippocrates first gave the physician an independent standing,
separating him from the cosmological speculator. Hippocrates confined
the medical man to medicine. He did with medical thought what Socrates
did with thought in general—he “brought it down from heaven to
earth.” His watchword was “Back to Nature!”

At the same time, while assigning the physician his post, Hippocrates
would not let him regard that post as sacrosanct. He set his face
against any tendency to mystery-mongering, to exclusiveness, to
sacerdotalism. He was, in fact, opposed to the spirit of
trade-unionism in medicine. His concern was rather with the
physician’s duties than his “rights.”

At the dawn of recorded medical history Hippocrates stands for the
fundamental and primary importance of _seeing clearly_—that is of
_clinical observation_. And what he observed was that the human
organism, when exposed to certain abnormal conditions—certain
stresses—tends to behave in a certain way: that in other words, each
“disease” tends to run a certain definite course. To him a disease was
essentially a process, one and indivisible, and thus his practical
problem was essentially one of _prognosis_—“what will be the natural
course of this disease, if left to itself?” Here he found himself to
no small extent in opposition with the teaching of the neighbouring
medical school of Cnidus, where a more static view-point laid special
emphasis upon the minutiae of _diagnosis_.

Observation taught Hippocrates to place unbounded faith in the
recuperative powers of the living organism—in what we sometimes call
nowadays the _vis medicatrix Naturae_. His observation was that even
with a very considerable “abnormality” of environmental stress the
organism, in the large majority of cases, manages eventually by its
own inherent powers to adjust itself to the new conditions. “Merely
give Nature a chance,” said the father of medicine in effect, “and
most diseases will cure themselves.” And accordingly his treatment
was mainly directed towards “giving Nature a chance.”

His keen sense of the solidarity (or rather, of the constant
interplay) between the organism and its environment (the “conditions”
to which it is exposed) is instanced in his book, “Airs, Waters, and
Places.” As we recognise, in our popular everyday psychology, that “it
takes two to make a quarrel,” so Hippocrates recognised that in
pathology, it takes two (organism and environment) to make a disease.

As an outstanding example of his power of clinical observation we may
recall the _facies Hippocratica_, an accurate study of the countenance
of a dying man.

His ideals for the profession are embodied in the “Hippocratic oath.”

[Sidenote: Anatomy.]

Impressed by this view of the organism as a unity, the Hippocratic
school tended in some degree to overlook the importance of its
constituent _parts_. The balance was re-adjusted later on by the
labours of the anatomical school of Alexandria, which, under the aegis
of the enlightened Ptolemies, arose in the 3rd century B.C. Two
prominent exponents of anatomy belonging to this school were
Herophilus and Erasistratus, the latter of whom we shall frequently
meet with in the following pages (_v._ p. 95 _et seq._).

[Sidenote: The Empirics.]

After the death of the Master, the Hippocratic school tended, as so
often happens with the best of cultural movements, to show signs
itself of diminishing vitality: the letter began to obscure and hamper
the spirit. The comparatively small element of theory which existed in
the Hippocratic physiology was made the groundwork of a somewhat
over-elaborated “system.” Against this tendency on the part of the
“Dogmatic” or “Rationalist” school there arose, also at Alexandria,
the sect of the Empiricists. “It is not,” they said, “the cause but
the cure of diseases that concerns us; not how we digest, but what is
digestible.”

[Sidenote: Greek Medicine in Rome.]

Horace said “_Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit_.” Political
domination, the occupation of territory by armies, does not
necessarily mean real conquest. Horace’s statement applied to medicine
as to other branches of culture.

The introducer of Greek medicine into Rome was Asclepiades (1st
century B.C.). A man of forceful personality, and equipped with a
fully developed philosophic system of health and disease which
commended itself to the Roman _savants_ of the day, he soon attained
to the pinnacle of professional success in the Latin capital: he is
indeed to all time the type of the fashionable (and somewhat “faddy”)
West-end physician. His system was a purely mechanistic one, being
based upon the atomic doctrine of Leucippus and Democritus, which had
been completed by Epicurus and recently introduced to the Roman public
in Lucretius’s great poem “_De Rerum Natura_.” The disbelief of
Asclepiades in the self-maintaining powers of the living organism are
exposed and refuted at considerable length by Galen in the volume
before us.

[Sidenote: The Methodists.]

Out of the teaching of Asclepiades that physiological processes depend
upon the particular way in which the ultimate indivisible molecules come
together (ἐν τῇ ποίᾳ συνόδῳ τῶν πρώτων ἐκείνων σωμάτων τῶν άπαθῶν) there
was developed by his pupil, Themison of Laodicea, a system of medicine
characterised by the most engaging simplicity both of diagnosis and
treatment. This so-called “Methodic” system was intended to strike a
balance between the excessive leaning to apriorism shown by the
Rationalist (Hippocratic) school and the opposite tendency of the
Empiricists. “A pathological theory we must have,” said the Methodists
in effect, “but let it be simple.” They held that the molecular groups
constituting the tissues were traversed by minute channels (πόροι,
“pores”); all diseases belonged to one or other of two classes; if the
channels were constricted the disease was one of _stasis_ (στέγνωσις),
and if they were dilated the disease was one of _flux_ (ῥύσις). Flux and
stasis were indicated respectively by increase and diminution of the
natural secretions; treatment was of opposites by opposites—of stasis
by methods causing dilatation of the channels, and conversely.

Wild as it may seem, this pathological theory of the Methodists
contained an element of truth; in various guises it has cropped up
once and again at different epochs of medical history; even to-day
there are pathologists who tend to describe certain classes of disease
in terms of vaso-constriction and vaso-dilatation. The vice of the
Methodist teaching was that it looked on a disease too much as
something fixed and finite, an independent _entity_, to be considered
entirely apart from its particular setting. The Methodists illustrate
for us the tyranny of _names_. In its defects as in its virtues this
school has analogues at the present day; we are all acquainted with
the medical man to whom a name (such, let us say, as “tuberculosis,”
“gout,” or “intestinal auto-intoxication”) stands for an entity, one
and indivisible, to be treated by a definite and unvarying formula.

To such an individual the old German saying “_Jedermann hat am Ende
ein Bischen Tuberkulose_” is simply—incomprehensible.

[Sidenote: Galen.]

All the medical schools which I have mentioned were still holding
their ground in the 2nd century A.D., with more or less popular
acceptance, when the great Galen made his entry into the world of
Graeco-Roman medicine.

