The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mystery and Romance of Alchemy and
Pharmacy, by Charles John Samuel Thompson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.


Title: The Mystery and Romance of Alchemy and Pharmacy

Author: Charles John Samuel Thompson

Release Date: September 29, 2014 [EBook #47004]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



“I have magic formulæ made by the Universal Lord to drive out the
stroke of god and goddess, the Male Death and Female Death, _et
cetera_,[1] that is in this my head, in this my neck, in this
my shoulder, in this my flesh, in these my limbs, to punish the
above-named enchanters (?) who introduce disturbance into this my
flesh.”

        [1] Etc. is probably a direction _ad lib._ for the doctor
        speaking the formulæ.

Such formulæ, evidently for recitation during the treatment, continue
for a page and a half. The book has thus no general title, but plunges
at once into the mysteries of the profession.

“Beginning of the mystery of the physician who knows the motion of
the heart. There are vessels in it to every limb. When any physician,
doctor, or amulet-maker puts his fingers upon the top of the head, upon
the occiput, upon the hands, upon the chest, upon the arms, upon the
legs, he communicates (?) with the heart, for its vessels extend to
every limb, wherefore it is called the starting-point of every limb.”

The following may be taken as an example of the recipes given in the
manuscript:—

“A remedy for the belly that is painful: Cummin 1∕64 hin, goose-grease
1∕8 hin, milk 1∕16 hekt; cool, strain, and drink”. The hin is about 29
cubic inches, and the 1∕16 hekt 18 cubic inches; the prescription is
thus roundly 1∕2 cubic inch of cummin, and 4 of goose fat, in half a
pint of milk.

This papyrus contains 110 pages, each page consisting of about
twenty-two lines of bold Hieratic writing. It may be described as an
encyclopædia of medicine as known and practised by the Egyptians of
the eighteenth dynasty, and it contains prescriptions of all kinds of
diseases—some borrowed from Syrian medical lore, and some of such
great antiquity that they are ascribed to the mythological ages,
when the gods yet reigned personally on earth. Among others is given
the recipe for an application whereby Osiris cured Ra of a headache.
In this papyrus is an example of an old Egyptian diagnosis and
therapeutics, as follows: “When thou findest any one with a hardness
in his re-hit (pit of the stomach), and when, after eating, he feels
a pressure on his intestines, his hit is swollen and he feels bad in
walking like one who suffers from heat in his back, then observe him
when he lies stretched out, and if thou findest his intestines hot and
a hardness in his re-hit, say unto thyself, This is a disease of the
liver. Then prepare for thyself according to the secrets of the science
from the plant pa-che-test and dates, mix them, and give in water.”

It also contains numerous recipes for the treatment of diseases, for
internal and external use. Most of the drugs mentioned are derived from
indigenous plants, and such chemical bodies as alum, salt, nitre, and
sulphate of copper are included in some of the prescriptions.

It seems probable that most of the medicines used in these early
times were first tried as foods; and those which when taken in large
quantities or in special conditions influenced the functions of the
body, these and others found to be too strong for dietetic use were
relegated to the books of medicine.

As an instance of this, the leaves and seeds of the castor oil plant
and the astringent sycamore fig are included in many recipes, but
Maspero states that there is little doubt that castor oil was taken
regularly in food in the time of the Pharaohs, and at the present time
it is a favourite adjunct to the salads of the Egyptian fellaheen.
The same writer thinks the Egyptians began by eating every kind of
food which the country produced, and so became acquainted with their
therapeutic properties.

In another papyrus said to have been written about the time of King
Chata of the first dynasty, who reigned B.C. 4000, the following
prescription for promoting the growth of the hair is given:—

  Pad of a dog’s foot                1
  Fruit of date palm                 1
  Ass’s hoof                         1
              Boil together in oil.

Dr. v. Oefele states of pharmacy before the time of Hippocrates, that
although the practice of medicine was not separated from pharmacy among
the Greeks and Romans, there was such a separation among the ancient
Egyptians, from whom the distinction was handed down to the Copts,
and by them to the Arabians; and, in fact, that the term pharmacist
is probably of Egyptian origin, being derived from Ph-ar-maki, which
signifies the preparation of medicine from drugs. The Egyptian pharmaki
who were engaged in that occupation belonged to the higher social
ranks of writers or academically-educated persons, comprising also the
priests, physicians, statesmen, and military commanders.

The Jews were indebted to Egypt for their primary ideas of medicine,
but they cast away the ideas of demonology and magic which clouded
what was good in the practice of Egypt. The Talmud recommends onions
for worms, and wine, pepper, and asafœtida for flatulency. The
Talmudists are responsible for calling the earth, air, fire, and water
elementary bodies. In the middle ages the Jews rendered service to the
healing art, and had a large share in the scientific work connected
with the Arab domination of Spain.

In China the use of drugs goes back to a very remote age, and alchemy
was practised by the Chinese long previous to its being known in
Europe. For two centuries prior to the Christian era, and for four or
more subsequent, the transmutation of the base metals into gold, and
the composition of the elixir of immortality, were questions ardently
studied by the Chinese. It is, moreover, a matter of history that
intercourse between China and Persia was frequent both before and
after the Mahomedan conquest of the latter country; that embassies
from Persia as well as from the Arabs, and even from the Greeks in
Constantinople, visited the court of the Chinese emperor in Shansi;
that Arab traders settled in China, and that there was frequent
intercourse by sea between China and the Persian Gulf; and lastly, that
China had an extensive alchemical literature anterior to the period
when alchemy was studied in the West. All these facts go to prove that
the ancient science known as alchemy was originated by the Chinese, and
not by the disciples of Mahomed, who only acquired the knowledge at
second hand.[2]

        [2] Hanbury’s _Notes on Chinese Materia Medica_.

It is somewhat curious that while the alchemists of the West were
always in doubt as to what constituted the true Philosopher’s Stone,
the Chinese seemingly had no doubt as to its identity. Cinnabar was
regarded by the early alchemists and philosophers of that nation as
the wonderful body which was supposed to have the mysterious power
of converting other metals into gold, and when used as a medicine
would prolong life for an indefinite period. Ko-hung, author of the
_Pau-p’uh-tsi p’ian_, a work of the fourth century, and undoubtedly
genuine, gives various mineral and vegetable productions possessing in
different degrees the properties of an elixir vitæ. In one paragraph of
this work he states: “When vegetable matter is burnt it is destroyed,
but when the Ian-sha (Cinnabar) is subjected to heat it produces
mercury. After passing through other changes it returns to its original
form. It differs widely, therefore, from vegetable substances, and
hence it has the power of making men live for ever and raising them to
the rank of the genii. He who knows the doctrine, is he not far above
common men, etc.?”

In _materia medica_ the knowledge of the Chinese was much in
advance of the nations of the West, and their great herbal, entitled
_Pun-Isaun-Kang-Mûh_, written by Le-she-chin in the middle of the
sixteenth century, shows the discernment possessed by these curious
people. This work consists of forty thin octavo volumes, the first
three of which contain woodcuts of many of the minerals, plants, and
animals referred to in the text. The woodcuts alone number 1100, and
the work itself is divided into fifty-two divisions. The antiquity
of the practice of medicine among the Chinese may be gathered from
the fact that there exists a work entitled _A Treatise from the Heart
on the Small-pox_, which was written during the dynasty of Icheon,
B.C. 1122. In this work the eruption is described, and some kind of
inoculation is also referred to as a remedy.

But it is to Greece that we have to look for the birth of medical art
in the West, its practice by the priests being of great antiquity.
The earliest record of a temple of medicine is of one erected in the
Peloponnesus in the year B.C. 1130, or about fifty years after the fall
of Troy. Other temples or centres of the healing art gradually sprang
up, and round each of those clustered a little school of students.
There were the temple of Health at Pergamus, the temple of Hygeia at
Cytea, and the temples of Æsculapius at Cos and Epidamus, where the
famous statue of Æsculapius stood. The father of ancient medicine,
Hippocrates, graduated as a student of Cos, and Galen is said to have
been at Epidamus.

It was in the temple of Æsculapius at Greece that any record of
medicine was first kept, the names of diseases and their cures being
registered on tablets of marble. The priests and priestesses, who were
the guardians of the temple, prepared the remedies and directed their
application, and thus commenced the practice of physic as a regular
profession.

These official persons were ambitious to pass as the legitimate
descendants of Æsculapius, and therefore assumed the title of
the Asclepiades. The writings of Pausanius, Plutarch, and others
abound with accounts of the artifices of these early practitioners.
Aristophanes mentions the dexterity and promptitude with which they
collected and put into their bags the offerings on the altar.

The patients were wont to repose on the skins of sacrificed rams in
order to procure celestial visions. As soon as they were supposed to
be asleep, a priest, clothed in the dress of Æsculapius, imitating his
manner, and accompanied by the daughters of the god (that is, by young
actresses well up in their parts), entered and solemnly delivered a
medical opinion. The student sat at the feet of the philosopher of his
choice, and after a certain period and course of probation, was granted
the rights of priest and physician to practise as a teacher and healer.

They had their code and ethics of a standard almost equal to those of
to-day, and their knowledge of surgery, and the use of the herbs and
plants which grew around them, was not a little.

Entering on their novitiate at their chosen temple or school, they were
required to make a protestation or oath, of which the following is the
one made by Hippocrates:—

“I, Hippocrates, do now promise and protest to the great god Apollo
and his two daughters Hygeia and Panadie, and also to all the gods and
goddesses, to observe the contents of this oath or tables wherein the
oath is carved, written, or engraved, so far as I can possibly, and so
far as my wit or understanding shall be able to direct me, _viz._, I
yield myself tributary and debtor to the master and doctor, who hath
instructed me and showed me this science and doctrine, even as much
or rather more than to my father who hath begotten me, and that I
shall live and communicate with him, and follow him in all necessities
which I shall know him to have, so far as my power shall permit and
my goods extend. Also that I shall love and cherish his children as
my brother’s, and his progeny as my own. Further, that I shall teach,
show and demonstrate the said science without reward or covenant, and
that I shall give all the canons, rules and precepts freely, truly and
faithfully to my master, his children as to my own, without hiding or
unacting anything, and to all other scholars who shall make the same
oath or protestation, and to no others. Also that in practising and
using my science towards the sick, I shall use only things necessary,
so far as I am able, and as my spirit and good understanding shall
give unto me, and that I shall cure the sick as speedily as I may
without dilating or prolonging the malady, and that I shall not do
anything against equity for hatred, anger, envy or malice to any
person whatsoever. Moreover, that I shall minister no poison, neither
counsel nor teach poison, nor the composing thereof to any. Also that
I shall not give nor cause to be given, nor contend that anything be
applied to a woman breeding, to destroy and make her void her fruit.
But I shall protest to keep my life and science purely, sincerely and
inviolably, without deceit, fraud or guile. And that I shall not cut
or incise any person having the stone, but shall leave the same to
those who are expert in it. And, furthermore, that I shall not enter
into the patient’s house lest with purpose to heal him, and that I
shall patiently sustain the injuries, reproaches, and loathsomeness of
sick men and other base railings, and that I shall eschew, as far as
I may, all venereous lasciviousness. Moreover, I protest, be it man,
woman, or servant who is my patient, to cure them of all things, that
I may see or hear either in mind or manner, and I shall not betray
that which should be concealed or hidden, but keep inviolable with
silence; neither reveal any creature under pain of death. And therefore
I beseech our gods that observing this protestation, promise, and vow
entirely and inviolably, all things in my life, in my art, and science,
may succeed securely, healthfully, and prosperously to me, and in the
end eternal glory.

“And to him that shall violate, transgress, or become perjured, that
the contrary may happen unto him, _viz._, misery, calamities, and
continual maladies.”

We have here principles laid down which would do honour to any medical
body, and which show the highly civilised condition and the excellent
moral teaching of the early Greek philosophers and priests.




CHAPTER II.

THE WIZARDS OF EARLY GREECE.


One of the earliest magicians or soothsayers of which we have record
out of the era of mythology was Tiresias. He lived in the times of
Œdipus and the war of the seven chiefs against Thebes. For having
offended the gods he was visited with blindness, but being repentant,
tradition states they recompensed him for this affliction by endowing
him with the gift of prophecy and the act of divination. He is also
said to have been able to hold communion with the feathered world, and
to have power over the spirits of the dead, whom he could compel to
appear and reply to his inquiries. His incantations and spells were
supposed to be irresistible, and he could foretell future events by
signs from fire, smoke, and other methods of divining.

Abaris, a native of Scythia, was another magician of renown. There is
no exact record of the time in which he lived, but he is represented
by some as having constructed the Palladium which protected Troy from
its enemies for a long time. Other authors declare he was a friend of
Pythagoras, who flourished some 600 years later.

According to Herodotus, he travelled over the world with an arrow,
eating nothing during his journey. By others it is said the arrow was
presented to him by Apollo, and that upon it he rode through the air,
and travelled over lands, seas, mountains, and other inaccessible
places. But from all accounts his repute as a magician and seer is
confirmed. He is said to have foretold earthquakes, allayed storms and
pestilence, cured disease by charms and incantations, and was generally
revered for his power and command over the dwellers in the unseen world.

Pythagoras, one of the most notable magicians in early history, was
born about the year B.C. 586, and lived during the time of Cyrus and
Darius Hystaspes, of Crœsus, of Pisistratus, of Polycrates, and
Amasis King of Egypt. He was renowned not only as a philosopher but as
a leader and politician, and was learned in all branches of science
then known. The early part of his life was spent in Egypt, but he also
travelled in order to gather experience and knowledge until he reached
the age of forty years.

Afterwards he founded a school, where he lectured and instructed
a large number of followers who were attracted by his wisdom and
learning. He divided his pupils into two classes: the neophytes, to
whom were explained the elementary and general principles of his
philosophy, while the advanced were admitted into his entire confidence
and formed a brotherhood, who threw their property into a common stock
and lived together.

