The Project Gutenberg EBook of Outlines of Greek and Roman Medicine, by 
James Sands Elliott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Outlines of Greek and Roman Medicine

Author: James Sands Elliott

Release Date: May 5, 2007 [EBook #21325]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



The doctors of Ancient Rome took no regular course of study, nor were
any standards specified, but as a rule knowledge was acquired by
pupilage to a practising physician, for which a honorarium was paid.
Subsequently the Archiatri, after the manner of trade guilds, received
apprentices, but Pliny had cause to complain of the system of medical
education, or rather, to deplore the want of it. He wrote: "People
believed in anyone who gave himself out for a doctor, even if the
falsehood directly entailed the greatest danger. Unfortunately, there is
no law which punishes doctors for ignorance, and no one takes revenge on
a doctor if through his fault someone dies. It is permitted him by our
danger to learn for the future, at our death to make experiments, and,
without having to fear punishment, to set at naught the life of a human
being."

Before the time when Greek doctors settled in Rome, medical treatment
was mainly under the direct charge of the head of each household. The
father of a family had great powers conferred upon him by the Roman law,
and was physician as well as judge over his family. If he took his
new-born infant in his arms he recognized him as his son, but otherwise
the child had no claim upon him. He could inflict the most dire
punishments on members of his household for which they had no redress.

Cato, the Elder, who died in B.C. 149, wrote a guide to domestic
medicine for the use of Roman fathers of the Republic, but he was a
quack and full of self-conceit. He hated the physicians practising in
Rome, who were mostly Greeks, and thought that their knowledge was much
inferior to his own. Plutarch relates that Cato knew of the answer given
to the King of Persia by Hippocrates, when sent for professionally, "I
will never make use of my art in favour of barbarians who are enemies of
the Greeks," and pretended to believe that all Greek physicians were
bound by the same rule, and animated by the same motives. However, Cato
did a great deal of good by attempting to lessen the vice and luxury of
his age.

The Greeks in Rome were looked at askance as foreign adventurers, and
there is no doubt that although many were honourable men, others came to
Rome merely to make money out of the superstitious beliefs and credulity
of the Roman people. Fine clothes, a good house, and the giving of
entertainments, were the best introduction to practice that some of
these practitioners could devise.

The medical opinions of Cato throw a sidelight upon the state of
medicine in his time. He attempted to cure dislocations by uttering a
nonsensical incantation: "_Huat hanat ista pista sista damiato
damnaustra!_" He considered ducks, geese and hares a light and suitable
diet for the sick, and had no faith in fasting.

Although the darkness was prolonged and intense before the dawn of
medical science in Rome, yet, in ancient times, there was a considerable
amount of knowledge of sanitation. The great sewer of Rome, the _Cloaca
Maxima_, which drained the swampy valley between the Capitoline and
Palatine Hills, was built by order of Tarquinius Priscus in 616 B.C. It
is wonderful that at the present time the visitor may see this ancient
work in the Roman Forum, and trace its course to the Tiber. In the
Forum, too, to the left of the Temple of Castor, is the sacred district
of Juturna, the nymph of the healing springs which well up at the base
of the Palatine Hill. _Lacus Juturnæ_ is a four-sided basin with a
pillar in the middle, on which rested a marble altar decorated with
figures in relief. Beside the basin are rooms for religious purposes.
These rooms are adorned with the gods of healing, Æsculapius with an
acolyte holding a cock, the Dioscuri and their horses, the head of
Serapis, and a headless statue of Apollo.

The Cloaca Maxima was formed of three tiers of arches, the vault within
the innermost tier being 14 ft. in diameter. The administration of the
sewers, in the time of the Republic, was in the hands of the censors,
but special officers called _curatores cloacarum_ were employed during
the Empire, and the workmen who repaired and cleansed the sewers were
condemned criminals. These ancient sewers, which have existed for
twenty-five centuries, are monuments to the wisdom and power of the
people who built them. In the time of Furius Camillus private drains
were connected with the public sewers which were flushed by aqueduct and
rain water. This system has prevailed throughout the centuries.

The Aqueducts were also marvellous works, and although they were added
to in the time of the Empire, Sextus Julius Frontinus, curator of waters
in the year A.D. 94, gives descriptions of the nine ancient aqueducts,
some of which were constructed long before the Empire. For instance, the
_Aqua Appia_ was conducted into the city three hundred and twelve years
before the advent of Christ, and was about seven miles long. The _Aqua
Anio Vetus_, sixty-two miles in length, built in B.C. 144, was conveyed
across the Campagna from a source in the country beyond Tivoli. Near
this place there is a spring of milky-looking water containing
sulphurous acid, sulphurated lime, and bicarbonate of lime, used now,
and in ancient times for the relief of skin complaints. This water, at
the present day, has an almost constant temperature of 75°.

In course of time, when the Roman power was being extended abroad, the
pursuit of conquest left little scope for the cultivation of the
peaceful arts and the investigation of science, and life itself was
accounted so cheap that little thought was given to improving methods
for the treatment of the sick and wounded. On a campaign every soldier
carried on his person a field-dressing, and the wounded received
rough-and-ready first-aid attention from their comrades in arms.

Later, when conquest was ended, and attention was given to the
consolidation of the provinces, ease and happiness, as has been shown by
Gibbon, tended to the decay of courage and thus to lessen the prowess of
the Roman legions, but there was compensation for this state of affairs
at the heart of the Empire because strong streams of capable and robust
recruits flowed in from Spain, Gaul, Britain and Illyricum.

At its commencement, the Empire was in a peaceful, and, on the whole,
prosperous condition, and the provincials, as well as the Romans,
"acknowledged that the true principles of social life, laws,
agriculture, and science, which had been first invented by the wisdom of
Athens, were now firmly established by the power of Rome, under whose
auspicious influence the fiercest barbarians were united by an equal
government and common language. They affirm that with the improvement of
arts the human species was visibly multiplied. They celebrate the
increasing splendour of the cities, the beautiful face of the country,
cultivated and adorned like an immense garden; and the long festival of
peace, which was enjoyed by so many nations, forgetful of their ancient
animosities, and delivered from the apprehension of future danger." Thus
wrote the Roman historian, and Gibbon states that when we discount as
much of this as we please as rhetorical and declamatory, the fact
remains that the substance of this description is in accordance with the
facts of history. Never until the Christian era was any thought given to
the regular care of the helpless and the abject. Slaves were often
treated like cattle, and the patricians had no bond of sympathy with the
plebeians. Provisions were sometimes distributed to the poor, and taxes
remitted, but for reasons of State and not from truly charitable
motives. Authority was also given to parents to destroy new-born infants
whom they could not support. The idea of establishing public
institutions for the relief of the sick and the poor did not enter the
minds of the ancient Romans.

Before considering the state of the healing art throughout the period of
the Roman Empire, it is necessary to devote the next chapters to a
consideration of the rise and progress of medical science in Greece,
for it cannot be too strongly emphasized that Roman philosophy and Roman
medicine were borrowed from the Greeks, and it is certain also that the
Greeks were indebted to the Egyptians for part of their medical
knowledge. The Romans were distinguished for their genius for law-giving
and government, the Greeks for philosophy, art, and mental culture
generally.

[Illustration: Plate I. BUST OF ÆSCULAPIUS.]




CHAPTER II.

EARLY GREEK MEDICINE.

     Apollo--Æsculapius--Temples--Serpents--Gods of
     Health--Melampus--Homer--Machaon--Podalarius--Temples of
     Æsculapius--Methods of Treatment--Gymnasia--Classification of
     Renouard--Pythagoras--Democedes--Greek Philosophers.


The history of healing begins in the Hellenic mythology with Apollo, the
god of light and the promoter of health. In the "Iliad" he is hailed as
the disperser of epidemics, and, in this respect, the ancients were well
informed in attributing destruction of infection to the sun's rays.
Chiron, the Centaur, it was believed, was taught by Apollo and Artemis,
and was the teacher, in turn, of Æsculapius, who probably lived in the
thirteenth century before Christ and was ultimately deified as the Greek
god of medicine. Pindar relates of him:--

    "On some the force of charmèd strains he tried,
    To some the medicated draught applied;
    Some limbs he placed the amulets around,
    Some from the trunk he cut, and made the patient sound."[1]

Æsculapius was too successful in his art, for his death was attributed
to Zeus, who killed him by a flash of lightning, or to Pluto, both of
whom were thought to have feared that Æsculapius might by his skill gain
the mastery over death.

Amid much that is mythological in the history of Æsculapius, there is a
groundwork of facts. Splendid temples were built to him in lovely and
healthy places, usually on a hill or near a spring; they were visited by
the sick, and the priests of the temples not only attended to the
worship of Æsculapius, but took pains to acquire knowledge of the
healing art. The chief temple was at Epidaurus, and here the patients
were well provided with amusements, for close to the temple was a
theatre capable of seating 12,000 people, and a stadium built to
accommodate 20,000 spectators.

A serpent entwined round a knotted staff is the symbol of Æsculapius. A
humorist of the present day has suggested that the knots on the staff
indicate the numerous "knotty" questions which a doctor is asked to
solve! Tradition states that when Æsculapius was in the house of his
patient, Glaucus, and deep in thought, a serpent coiled itself around
his staff. Æsculapius killed it, and then another serpent appeared with
a herb leaf in its mouth, and restored the dead reptile to life. It
seems probable that disease was looked upon as a poison. Serpents
produced poison, and had a reputation in the most ancient times for
wisdom, and for the power of renovation, and it was thought that a
creature which could produce poison and disease might probably be
capable of curing as well as killing. Serpents were kept in the Temples
of Æsculapius, and were non-poisonous and harmless. They were given
their liberty in the precincts of the temple, but were provided with a
serpent-house or den near to the altar. They were worshipped as the
incarnation of the god, and were fed by the sick at the altar with
"popana," or sacrificial cakes.

[Illustration: From Wellcome's Medical Diary (Copyright) By permission
of Burroughs Wellcome & Co.

Plate II.--HYGEIA

The Greek Deity of Health.]

Many of the Greek gods and goddesses were held to have power over
disease. Hygeia, known as Salus to the Romans, was said to have been the
daughter of Æsculapius, and to have taken care of the sacred serpents
(Plate II).

Melampus was considered by the Greeks the first mortal to practise
healing. In one case he prescribed rust, probably the earliest use of
iron as a drug, and he also used hellebore root as a purgative. He
married a princess and was given part of a kingdom as a reward for his
services. After his death he was awarded divine honours, and temples
were erected for his worship. The deification of Æsculapius and of
Melampus added much to the prestige of doctors in Greece, where they
were always held in honour; but in Rome the practice of medicine was not
considered a highly honourable calling.

Something can be learned from the writings of Homer of the state of
medicine in his time, although we need hardly expect to find in an epic
poem many references to diseases and their cure. As dissection was
considered a profanation of the body, anatomical knowledge was
exceedingly meagre. Machaon was surgeon to Menelaus and Podalarius was
the pioneer of phlebotomy. Both were regarded as the sons of Æsculapius;
they were soldiers as well as doctors, and fought before the walls of
Troy. The surgery required by Homer's heroes was chiefly that of the
battlefield. Unguents and astringents were in use in the physician's
art, and there is reference to "nepenthe," a narcotic drug, and also to
the use of sulphur as a disinfectant. Doctors, according to Homer, were
held in high esteem, and Arctinus relates that two divisions were
recognized, surgeons and physicians, the former held in less honour than
the latter--"Then Asclepius (Æsculapius) bestowed the power of healing
upon his two sons; nevertheless, he made one of the two more celebrated
than the other; on one did he bestow the lighter hand that he might draw
missiles from the flesh, and sew up and heal all wounds; but the other
he endowed with great precision of mind, so as to understand what cannot
be seen, and to heal seemingly incurable diseases."[2]

Machaon fought in the army of Nestor. Fearing for his safety, King
Idomeneus placed him under the charge of Nestor, who was instructed to
take the doctor into his chariot, for "a doctor is worth many men." When
Menelaus was wounded, a messenger was sent for Machaon, who extracted
the barbed arrow, sucked the wound and applied a secret ointment made
known to Æsculapius by Chiron the Centaur, according to tradition.

[Illustration: From Wellcome's Medical Diary (Copyright) By permission
of Burroughs Wellcome & Co.

MACHAON (SON OF ASKLEPIOS),

The first Greek military surgeon, attending to the wounded Menelaus.]

[Illustration: From Wellcome's Medical Diary (Copyright) Permission of
Burroughs Wellcome & Co.

Plate III.-FACADE OF TEMPLE OF ASKLEPIOS--RESTORED (Delfrasse).]

The practice of Greek medicine became almost entirely restricted to the
temples of Æsculapius, the most important of which were situated at
Rhodes, Cnidus and Cos. The priests were known as Asclepiadæ, but the
name was applied in time to the healers of the temple who were not
priests. Tablets were affixed to the walls of these temples recording
the name of the patient, the disease and the cure prescribed. There is
evidence that diseases were closely observed. The patients brought gifts
to the temples, and underwent a preliminary purification by ablutions,
fasting, prayer and sacrifice. A cock was a common sacrifice to the god.
No doubt many wonderful cures were effected. Mental suggestion was used
greatly, and the patient was put to sleep, his cure being often revealed
to him in a dream which was interpreted by the priests. The expectancy
of his mind, and the reduced state of his body as the result of
abstinence conduced to a cure, and trickery also played a minor part.
Albeit, much of the treatment prescribed was commendable. Pure air,
cheerful surroundings, proper diet and temperate habits were advocated,
and, among other methods of treatment, exercise, massage, sea-bathing,
the use of mineral waters, purgatives and emetics, and hemlock as a
sedative, were in use. If a cure was not effected, the faith of the
patient was impugned, and not the power of the god or the skill of the
Asclepiades, so that neither religion nor the practice of physic was
exposed to discredit. Great was the wisdom of the Greeks! These temples
were the famous medical schools of ancient Greece. A spirit of
emulation prevailed, and a high ethical standard was attained, as is
shown by the oath prescribed for students when they completed their
course of study. The form of oath will be found in a succeeding chapter
in connection with an account of the life of Hippocrates.

[Illustration: Plate IV.--HEALTH TEMPLE--RESTORED (Caton).

_Face p. 20._]

The remains of the Health Temple, or Asklepieion, of Cos were brought to
light in 1904 and 1905, by the work of Dr. Rudolf Herzog, of Tübingen.
Dr. Richard Caton, of Liverpool, has been able to reconstruct
pictorially the beautiful buildings that existed two thousand years ago.
They were situated among the hills. The sacred groves of cypresses were
on three sides of the temple, and "to the north the verdant plain of
Cos, with the white houses and trees of the town to the right, and the
wide expanse of turquoise sea dotted by the purple islands of the Ægean,
and the dim mountains about Halicarnassus, to the north-east."[3]

The ancient Greek Gymnasia were in use long before the Asclepiades began
to practise in the temples. The Greeks were a healthy and strong race,
mainly because they attended to physical culture as a national duty. The
attendants who massaged the bodies of the athletes were called _aliptæ_,
and they also taught physical exercises, and practised minor surgery and
medicine. Massage was used before and after exercises in the gymnasium,
and was performed by anointing the body with a mixture of oil and sand
which was well rubbed into the skin. There were three classes of
officials in the gymnasia; the director or magistrate called the
_gymnasiarch_, the sub-director or _gymnast_, and the subordinates. The
directors regulated the diet of the young men, the _sub-directors_,
besides other duties, prescribed for the sick, and the attendants
massaged, bled, dressed wounds, gave clysters, and treated abscesses,
dislocations, &c.

There is no doubt that the Greeks, in insisting upon the physical
training of the young, were wiser in their generation than the people of
the present day; and not only the young, but people of mature age, took
exercises suited to their physical requirements. The transgression of
some of Solon's laws in reference to the gymnasia was punishable by
death.

The third stage in the history of Greek medicine has now been reached.
The first stage was primitive, the second associated with religion, and
the third connected with philosophy. The classification of Renouard is
accurate and convenient. In the "Age of Foundation," he recognizes four
periods, namely:--

(1) The Primitive Period, or that of Instinct, beginning with myth, and
ending with the destruction of Troy, 1184 years before Christ.

(2) The Sacred or Mystic Period, ending with the dispersion of the
Pythagorean Society, 500 years before Christ.

(3) The Philosophic Period, ending with the foundation of the
Alexandrian library, 320 years before Christ. This period is made
illustrious by Hippocrates.

(4) The Anatomic Period, ending with the death of Galen, about 200 years
after Christ.

The earliest Greek medical philosopher was Pythagoras (about 580 B.C.).
He was born at Samos, and began life as an athlete, but a lecture which
he heard on the subject of the immortality of the soul kindled
enthusiasm for philosophical study, the pursuit of which led him to
visit Egypt, Phœnicia, Chaldea, and perhaps also India. He was imbued
with Eastern mysticism, and held that the air is full of spiritual
beings who send dreams to men, and health or disease to mankind and to
the lower animals. He did not remain long in Greece, but travelled much,
and settled for a considerable time in Crotona, in the South of Italy,
where he taught pupils, their course of study extending over five or six
years. The Pythagorean Society founded by him did much good at first,
but its members ultimately became greedy of gain and dishonest, and the
Society in the lifetime of its founder was subjected to persecution and
dispersed by angry mobs. Pythagoras possessed a prodigious mind. He is
best known for his teaching in reference to the transmigration of
souls, but he was also a great mathematician and astronomer. He taught
that "number is the essence of everything," and his philosophy
recognized that the universe is governed by law. God he represented by
the figure 1, matter by the figure 2, and the universe by the
combination 12, all of which, though fanciful, was an improvement upon
mythology, and a recognition of system.

In the practice of medicine he promoted health mainly by diet and
gymnastics, advised music for depression of spirits, and had in use
various vegetable drugs. He introduced oxymel of squills from Egypt into
Greece, and was a strong believer in the medicinal properties of onions.
He viewed surgery with disfavour, and used only salves and poultices.
The Asclepiades treated patients in the temples, but the Pythagoreans
visited from house to house, and from city to city, and were known as
the ambulant or periodic physicians.

Herodotus gives an account of another eminent physician of Crotona,
_Democedes_ by name, who succeeded Pythagoras. At this time, it is
recorded that the various cities had public medical officers. Democedes
gained his freedom from slavery as a reward for curing the wife of
Darius of an abscess in the breast.

The dispersal of the Pythagoreans led to the settlement of many of them,
and of their imitators, in Rome and various parts of Italy. Although
Pythagoras was a philosopher, he belongs to the Mystic Period, while
Hippocrates is the great central figure of the Philosophic Period.
Before studying the work of Hippocrates, it is necessary to consider the
distinguishing features of the various schools of Greek philosophy.
Renouard shows that the principles of the various schools of medical
belief depended upon the three great Greek schools of Cosmogony.

Pythagoras believed in a Supreme Ruler of the Universe, and that spirits
animated all life, and existed even in minerals; he also believed in
preconceived purpose. With these views were associated the Dogmatic
School of Medicine, and the name of Hippocrates, and this belief
corresponds to modern vitalism.

Leucippus and Democritus, rejecting theology, considered vital action
secondary to the operation of the laws of matter, and believed that
atoms moved through pores in the body in such a way as to determine a
state of health or disease. With this philosophy was associated the
Medical School of Methodism, a system said to have been founded by
Asclepiades of Prusa (who lived in Rome in the first century before
Christ), and by his pupil Themison (B.C. 50). The third school of
medical thought, that of Empiricism, taught that experience was the only
teacher, and that it was idle to speculate upon remote causes. The
Empirics based these views upon the teaching of philosophers known as
Sceptics or Zetetics, followers of Parmenides and Pyrrho, who taught
that it was useless to fatigue the mind in endeavouring to comprehend
what is beyond its range. They were the precursors of modern
agnosticism.

The Eclectics, in a later age, formed another medical sect, and had no
definite system except that they made a selection of the views and
methods of Dogmatists, Methodists and Empirics.

The Greek philosophers as a class believed in a primary form of matter
out of which elements were formed, and the view held in regard to the
elements is expressed in Ovid's "Metamorphoses."[4]

    "Nor those which elements we call abide,
    Nor to this figure nor to that are ty'd:
    For this eternal world is said of old
    But four prolific principles to hold,
    Four different bodies; two to heaven ascend,
    And other two down to the centre tend.
    Fire first, with wings expanded, mounts on high,
    Pure, void of weight, and dwells in upper sky;
    Then air, because unclogged, in empty space
    Flies after fire, and claims the second place;
    But weighty water, as her nature guides,
    Lies on the lap of earth; and Mother Earth subsides.
    All things are mixed of these, which all contain,
    And into these are all resolved again."

