The Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Natural Faculties, by Galen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On the Natural Faculties

Author: Galen

Translator: Arthur John Brock

Release Date: August 2, 2013 [EBook #43383]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



Horace said “_Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit_.” Political
domination, the occupation of territory by armies, does not
necessarily mean real conquest. Horace’s statement applied to medicine
as to other branches of culture.

The introducer of Greek medicine into Rome was Asclepiades (1st
century B.C.). A man of forceful personality, and equipped with a
fully developed philosophic system of health and disease which
commended itself to the Roman _savants_ of the day, he soon attained
to the pinnacle of professional success in the Latin capital: he is
indeed to all time the type of the fashionable (and somewhat “faddy”)
West-end physician. His system was a purely mechanistic one, being
based upon the atomic doctrine of Leucippus and Democritus, which had
been completed by Epicurus and recently introduced to the Roman public
in Lucretius’s great poem “_De Rerum Natura_.” The disbelief of
Asclepiades in the self-maintaining powers of the living organism are
exposed and refuted at considerable length by Galen in the volume
before us.

[Sidenote: The Methodists.]

Out of the teaching of Asclepiades that physiological processes depend
upon the particular way in which the ultimate indivisible molecules come
together (ἐν τῇ ποίᾳ συνόδῳ τῶν πρώτων ἐκείνων σωμάτων τῶν άπαθῶν) there
was developed by his pupil, Themison of Laodicea, a system of medicine
characterised by the most engaging simplicity both of diagnosis and
treatment. This so-called “Methodic” system was intended to strike a
balance between the excessive leaning to apriorism shown by the
Rationalist (Hippocratic) school and the opposite tendency of the
Empiricists. “A pathological theory we must have,” said the Methodists
in effect, “but let it be simple.” They held that the molecular groups
constituting the tissues were traversed by minute channels (πόροι,
“pores”); all diseases belonged to one or other of two classes; if the
channels were constricted the disease was one of _stasis_ (στέγνωσις),
and if they were dilated the disease was one of _flux_ (ῥύσις). Flux and
stasis were indicated respectively by increase and diminution of the
natural secretions; treatment was of opposites by opposites—of stasis
by methods causing dilatation of the channels, and conversely.

Wild as it may seem, this pathological theory of the Methodists
contained an element of truth; in various guises it has cropped up
once and again at different epochs of medical history; even to-day
there are pathologists who tend to describe certain classes of disease
in terms of vaso-constriction and vaso-dilatation. The vice of the
Methodist teaching was that it looked on a disease too much as
something fixed and finite, an independent _entity_, to be considered
entirely apart from its particular setting. The Methodists illustrate
for us the tyranny of _names_. In its defects as in its virtues this
school has analogues at the present day; we are all acquainted with
the medical man to whom a name (such, let us say, as “tuberculosis,”
“gout,” or “intestinal auto-intoxication”) stands for an entity, one
and indivisible, to be treated by a definite and unvarying formula.

To such an individual the old German saying “_Jedermann hat am Ende
ein Bischen Tuberkulose_” is simply—incomprehensible.

[Sidenote: Galen.]

All the medical schools which I have mentioned were still holding
their ground in the 2nd century A.D., with more or less popular
acceptance, when the great Galen made his entry into the world of
Graeco-Roman medicine.

[Sidenote: His Nature and Nurture.]

Claudius Galenus was born at Pergamos in Asia Minor in the year 131
A.D. His father was one Nicon, a well-to-do architect of that city. “I
had the great good fortune,” says Galen,[1] “to have as a father a
highly amiable, just, good, and benevolent man. My mother, on the
other hand, possessed a very bad temper; she used sometimes to bite
her serving-maids, and she was perpetually shouting at my father and
quarrelling with him—worse than Xanthippe with Socrates. When,
therefore, I compared the excellence of my father’s disposition with
the disgraceful passions of my mother, I resolved to embrace and love
the former qualities, and to avoid and hate the latter.”

Nicon called his son Γαληνός, which means _quiet, peaceable_, and
although the physician eventually turned out to be a man of elevated
character, it is possible that his somewhat excessive leaning towards
controversy (exemplified in the following pages) may have resulted
from the fact that he was never quite able to throw off the worst
side of the maternal inheritance.

His father, a man well schooled in mathematics and philosophy, saw to
it that his son should not lack a liberal education. Pergamos itself
was an ancient centre of civilisation, containing, among other
culture-institutions, a library only second in importance to that of
Alexandria itself; it also contained an Asclepieum.

Galen’s training was essentially eclectic: he studied all the chief
philosophical systems of the time—Platonic, Aristotelian, Stoic, and
Epicurean—and then, at the age of seventeen, entered on a course of
medical studies; these he pursued under the best teachers at his own
city, and afterwards, during a period of _Wanderjahre_, at Smyrna,
Alexandria, and other leading medical centres.

Returning to Pergamos, he received his first professional
appointment—that of surgeon to the gladiators. After four years here
he was drawn by ambition to Rome, being at that time about thirty-one
years of age. At Rome the young Pergamene attained a brilliant
reputation both as a practitioner and as a public demonstrator of
anatomy; among his patients he finally numbered even the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius himself.

Medical practice in Rome at this time was at a low ebb, and Galen took
no pains to conceal his contempt for the ignorance, charlatanism, and
venality of his fellow-practitioners. Eventually, in spite of his
social popularity, he raised up such odium against himself in medical
circles, that he was forced to flee the city. This he did hurriedly
and secretly in the year 168 A.D., when thirty-six years of age. He
betook himself to his old home at Pergamos, where he settled down once
more to a literary life.

His respite was short, however, for within a year he was summoned back
to Italy by imperial mandate. Marcus Aurelius was about to undertake
an expedition against the Germans, who at that time were threatening
the northern frontiers of the Empire, and he was anxious that his
consulting physician should accompany him to the front. “Patriotism”
in this sense, however, seems to have had no charms for the Pergamene,
and he pleaded vigorously to be excused. Eventually, the Emperor gave
him permission to remain at home, entrusting to his care the young
prince Commodus.

Thereafter we know little of Galen’s history, beyond the fact that he
now entered upon a period of great literary activity. Probably he died
about the end of the century.

[Sidenote: Subsequent History of Galen’s Works.]

Galen wrote extensively, not only on anatomy, physiology, and medicine
in general, but also on logic; his logical proclivities, as will be
shown later, are well exemplified in his medical writings. A
considerable number of undoubtedly genuine works of his have come down
to us. The full importance of his contributions to medicine does not
appear to have been recognized till some time after his death, but
eventually, as already pointed out, the terms Galenism and Greek
medicine became practically synonymous.

A few words may be devoted to the subsequent history of his writings.

[Sidenote: Byzantine Medicine.]

During and after the final break-up of the Roman Empire came times or
confusion and of social reconstruction, which left little opportunity
for scientific thought and research. The Byzantine Empire, from the
4th century onwards, was the scene of much internal turmoil, in which
the militant activities of the now State-established Christian church
played a not inconsiderable part. The Byzantine medical scholars
were at best compilers, and a typical compiler was Oribasius,
body-physician to the Emperor Julian (4th century, A.D.); his
excellent _Synopsis_ was written in order to make the huge mass of
the Galenic writings available for the ordinary practitioner.

[Sidenote: Arabian Medicine.]

Greek medicine spread, with general Greek culture, throughout Syria,
and from thence was carried by the Nestorians, a persecuted heretical
sect, into Persia; here it became implanted, and hence eventually
spread to the Mohammedan world. Several of the Prophet’s successors
(such as the Caliphs Harun-al-Rashid and Abdul-Rahman III) were great
patrons of Greek learning, and especially of medicine. The Arabian
scholars imbibed Aristotle and Galen with avidity. A partial
assimilation, however, was the farthest stage to which they could
attain; with the exception of pharmacology, the Arabians made
practically no independent additions to medicine. They were
essentially systematizers and commentators. “_Averrois che il gran
comento feo_”[2] may stand as the type _par excellence_ of the Moslem
sage.

