The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zoonomia, Vol. I, by Erasmus Darwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Zoonomia, Vol. I
       Or, the Laws of Organic Life

Author: Erasmus Darwin

Release Date: April 25, 2005 [EBook #15707]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



The whole of nature may be supposed to consist of two essences or
substances; one of which may be termed spirit, and the other matter. The
former of these possesses the power to commence or produce motion, and the
latter to receive and communicate it. So that motion, considered as a
cause, immediately precedes every effect; and, considered as an effect, it
immediately succeeds every cause.

The MOTIONS OF MATTER may be divided into two kinds, primary and secondary.
The secondary motions are those, which are given to or received from other
matter in motion. Their laws have been successfully investigated by
philosophers in their treatises on mechanic powers. These motions are
distinguished by this circumstance, that the velocity multiplied into the
quantity of matter of the body acted upon is equal to the velocity
multiplied into the quantity of matter of the acting body.

The primary motions of matter may be divided into three classes, those
belonging to gravitation, to chemistry, and to life; and each class has its
peculiar laws. Though these three classes include the motions of solid,
liquid, and aerial bodies; there is nevertheless a fourth division of
motions; I mean those of the supposed ethereal fluids of magnetism,
electricity, heat, and light; whose properties are not so well investigated
as to be classed with sufficient accuracy.

_1st._ The gravitating motions include the annual and diurnal rotation of
the earth and planets, the flux and reflux of the ocean, the descent of
heavy bodies, and other phænomena of gravitation. The unparalleled sagacity
of the great NEWTON has deduced the laws of this class of motions from the
simple principle of the general attraction of matter. These motions are
distinguished by their tendency to or from the centers of the sun or
planets.

_2d._ The chemical class of motions includes all the various appearances of
chemistry. Many of the facts, which belong to these branches of science,
are nicely ascertained, and elegantly classed; but their laws have not yet
been developed from such simple principles as those above-mentioned; though
it is probable, that they depend on the specific attractions belonging to
the particles of bodies, or to the difference of the quantity of attraction
belonging to the sides and angles of those particles. The chemical motions
are distinguished by their being generally attended with an evident
decomposition or new combination of the active materials.

_3d._ The third class includes all the motions of the animal and vegetable
world; as well those of the vessels, which circulate their juices, and of
the muscles, which perform their locomotion, as those of the organs of
sense, which constitute their ideas.

This last class of motion is the subject of the following pages; which,
though conscious of their many imperfections, I hope may give some pleasure
to the patient reader, and contribute something to the knowledge and to the
cure of diseases.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECT. II.

EXPLANATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.

    I. _Outline of the animal economy._--II. 1. _Of the sensorium._ 2. _Of
    the brain and nervous medulla._ 3. _A nerve._ 4. _A muscular fibre._ 5.
    _The immediate organs of sense._ 6. _The external organs of sense._ 7.
    _An idea or sensual motion._ 8. _Perception._ 9. _Sensation._ 10.
    _Recollection and suggestion._ 11. _Habit, causation, association,
    catenation._ 12. _Reflex ideas._ 13. _Stimulus defined._

       *       *       *       *       *

    As some explanations and definitions will be necessary in the
    prosecution of the work, the reader is troubled with them in this
    place, and is intreated to keep them in his mind as he proceeds, and to
    take them for granted, till an apt opportunity occurs to evince their
    truth; to which I shall premise a very short outline of the animal
    economy.

       *       *       *       *       *

I.--1. The nervous system has its origin from the brain, and is distributed
to every part of the body. Those nerves, which serve the senses,
principally arise from that part of the brain, which is lodged in the head;
and those, which serve the purposes of muscular motion, principally arise
from that part of the brain, which is lodged in the neck and back, and
which is erroneously called the spinal marrow. The ultimate fibrils of
these nerves terminate in the immediate organs of sense and muscular
fibres, and if a ligature be put on any part of their passage from the head
or spine, all motion and perception cease in the parts beneath the
ligature.

2. The longitudinal muscular fibres compose the locomotive muscles, whose
contractions move the bones of the limbs and trunk, to which their
extremities are attached. The annular or spiral muscular fibres compose the
vascular muscles, which constitute the intestinal canal, the arteries,
veins, glands, and absorbent vessels.

3. The immediate organs of sense, as the retina of the eye, probably
consist of moving fibrils, with a power of contraction similar to that of
the larger muscles above described.

4. The cellular membrane consists of cells, which resemble those of a
sponge, communicating with each other, and connecting together all the
other parts of the body.

5. The arterial system consists of the aortal and the pulmonary artery,
which are attended through their whole course with their correspondent
veins. The pulmonary artery receives the blood from the right chamber of
the heart, and carries it to the minute extensive ramifications of the
lungs, where it is exposed to the action of the air on a surface equal to
that of the whole external skin, through the thin moist coats of those
vessels, which are spread on the air-cells, which constitute the minute
terminal ramifications of the wind-pipe. Here the blood changes its colour
from a dark red to a bright scarlet. It is then collected by the branches
of the pulmonary vein, and conveyed to the left chamber of the heart.

6. The aorta is another large artery, which receives the blood from the
left chamber of the heart, after it has been thus aerated in the lungs, and
conveys it by ascending and descending branches to every other part of the
system; the extremities of this artery terminate either in glands, as the
salivary glands, lacrymal glands, &c. or in capillary vessels, which are
probably less involuted glands; in these some fluid, as saliva, tears,
perspiration, are separated from the blood; and the remainder of the blood
is absorbed or drank up by branches of veins correspondent to the branches
of the artery; which are furnished with valves to prevent its return; and
is thus carried back, after having again changed its colour to a dark red,
to the right chamber of the heart. The circulation of the blood in the
liver differs from this general system; for the veins which drink up the
refluent blood from those arteries, which are spread on the bowels and
mesentery, unite into a trunk in the liver, and form a kind of artery,
which is branched into the whole substance of the liver, and is called the
vena portarum; and from which the bile is separated by the numerous hepatic
glands, which constitute that viscus.

7. The glands may be divided into three systems, the convoluted glands,
such as those above described, which separate bile, tears, saliva, &c.
Secondly, the glands without convolution, as the capillary vessels, which
unite the terminations of the arteries and veins; and separate both the
mucus, which lubricates the cellular membrane, and the perspirable matter,
which preserves the skin moist and flexible. And thirdly, the whole
absorbent system, consisting of the lacteals, which open their mouths into
the stomach and intestines, and of the lymphatics, which open their mouths
on the external surface of the body, and on the internal linings of all the
cells of the cellular membrane, and other cavities of the body.

These lacteal and lymphatic vessels are furnished with numerous valves to
prevent the return of the fluids, which they absorb, and terminate in
glands, called lymphatic glands, and may hence be considered as long necks
or mouths belonging to these glands. To these they convey the chyle and
mucus, with a part of the perspirable matter, and atmospheric moisture; all
which, after having passed through these glands, and having suffered some
change in them, are carried forward into the blood, and supply perpetual
nourishment to the system, or replace its hourly waste.

8. The stomach and intestinal canal have a constant vermicular motion,
which carries forwards their contents, after the lacteals have drank up the
chyle from them; and which is excited into action by the stimulus of the
aliment we swallow, but which becomes occasionally inverted or retrograde,
as in vomiting, and in the iliac passion.

II. 1. The word _sensorium_ in the following pages is designed to express
not only the medullary part of the brain, spinal marrow, nerves, organs of
sense, and of the muscles; but also at the same time that living principle,
or spirit of animation, which resides throughout the body, without being
cognizable to our senses, except by its effects. The changes which
occasionally take place in the sensorium, as during the exertions of
volition, or the sensations of pleasure or pain, are termed _sensorial
motions_.

2. The similarity of the texture of the brain to that of the pancreas, and
some other glands of the body, has induced the inquirers into this subject
to believe, that a fluid, perhaps much more subtile than the electric aura,
is separated from the blood by that organ for the purposes of motion and
sensation. When we recollect, that the electric fluid itself is actually
accumulated and given out voluntarily by the torpedo and the gymnotus
electricus, that an electric shock will frequently stimulate into motion a
paralytic limb, and lastly that it needs no perceptible tubes to convey it,
this opinion seems not without probability; and the singular figure of the
brain and nervous system seems well adapted to distribute it over every
part of the body.

For the medullary substance of the brain not only occupies the cavities of
the head and spine, but passes along the innumerable ramifications of the
nerves to the various muscles and organs of sense. In these it lays aside
its coverings, and is intermixed with the slender fibres, which constitute
those muscles and organs of sense. Thus all these distant ramifications of
the sensorium are united at one of their extremities, that is, in the head
and spine; and thus these central parts of the sensorium constitute a
communication between all the organs of sense and muscles.

3. A _nerve_ is a continuation of the medullary substance of the brain from
the head or spine towards the other parts of the body, wrapped in its
proper membrane.

4. The _muscular fibres_ are moving organs intermixed with that medullary
substance, which is continued along the nerves, as mentioned above. They
are indued with the power of contraction, and are again elongated either by
antagonist muscles, by circulating fluids, or by elastic ligaments. So the
muscles on one side of the forearm bend the fingers by means of their
tendons, and those on the other side of the fore-arm extend them again. The
arteries are distended by the circulating blood; and in the necks of
quadrupeds there is a strong elastic ligament, which assists the muscles,
which elevate the head, to keep it in its horizontal position, and to raise
it after it has been depressed.

5. The _immediate organs of sense_ consist in like manner of moving fibres
enveloped in the medullary substance above mentioned; and are erroneously
supposed to be simply an expansion of the nervous medulla, as the retina of
the eye, and the rete mucosum of the skin, which are the immediate organs
of vision, and of touch. Hence when we speak of the contractions of the
fibrous parts of the body, we shall mean both the contractions of the
muscles, and those of the immediate organs of sense. These _fibrous
motions_ are thus distinguished from the _sensorial motions_ above
mentioned.

6. The _external organs_ of sense are the coverings of the immediate organs
of sense, and are mechanically adapted for the reception or transmission of
peculiar bodies, or of their qualities, as the cornea and humours of the
eye, the tympanum of the ear, the cuticle of the fingers and tongue.

7. The word _idea_ has various meanings in the writers of metaphysic: it is
here used simply for those notions of external things, which our organs of
sense bring us acquainted with originally; and is defined a contraction, or
motion, or configuration, of the fibres, which constitute the immediate
organ of sense; which will be explained at large in another part of the
work. Synonymous with the word idea, we shall sometimes use the words
_sensual motion_ in contradistinction to _muscular motion_.

8. The word _perception_ includes both the action of the organ of sense in
consequence of the impact of external objects, and our attention to that
action; that is, it expresses both the motion of the organ of sense, or
idea, and the pain or pleasure that succeeds or accompanies it.

9. The pleasure or pain which necessarily accompanies all those perceptions
or ideas which we attend to, either gradually subsides, or is succeeded by
other fibrous motions. In the latter case it is termed _sensation_, as
explained in Sect. V. 2, and VI. 2.--The reader is intreated to keep this
in his mind, that through all this treatise the word sensation is used to
express pleasure or pain only in its active state, by whatever means it is
introduced into the system, without any reference to the stimulation of
external objects.

10. The vulgar use of the word _memory_ is too unlimited for our purpose:
those ideas which we voluntarily recall are here termed ideas of
_recollection_, as when we will to repeat the alphabet backwards. And those
ideas which are suggested to us by preceding ideas are here termed ideas of
_suggestion_, as whilst we repeat the alphabet in the usual order; when by
habits previously acquired B is suggested by A, and C by B, without any
effort of deliberation.

