The Project Gutenberg EBook of Religio Medici, Hydriotaphia, and the
Letter to a Friend, by Thomas Browne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Religio Medici, Hydriotaphia, and the Letter to a Friend

Author: Thomas Browne

Annotator: J. W. Willis Bund

Release Date: November 11, 2019 [EBook #586]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


SIR THOMAS BROWNE (whose works occupy so prominent a position in the
literary history of the seventeenth century) is an author who is now
little known and less read. This comparative oblivion to which he has
been consigned is the more remarkable, as, if for nothing else, his
writings deserve to be studied as an example of the English language
in what may be termed a transition state. The prose of the Elizabethan
age was beginning to pass away and give place to a more inflated style
of writing--a style which, after passing through various stages of
development, culminated in that of Johnson.

Browne is one of the best early examples of this school; his style,
to quote Johnson himself, “is vigorous but rugged, it is learned but
pedantick, it is deep but obscure, it strikes but does not please, it
commands but does not allure. . . . It is a tissue of many languages, a
mixture of heterogeneous words brought together from distant regions.”

Yet in spite of this qualified censure, there are passages in Browne’s
works not inferior to any in the English language; and though his
writings may not be “a well of English undefiled,” yet it is the very
defilements that add to the beauty of the work.

But it is not only as an example of literary style that Browne deserves
to be studied. The matter of his works, the grandeur of his ideas, the
originality of his thoughts, the greatness of his charity, amply make
up for the deficiencies (if deficiencies there be) in his style. An
author who combined the wit of Montaigne with the learning of Erasmus,
and of whom even Hallam could say that “his varied talents wanted
nothing but the controlling supremacy of good sense to place him in the
highest rank of our literature,” should not be suffered to remain in
obscurity.

A short account of his life will form the best introduction to his
works.

Sir Thomas Browne was born in London, in the parish of St Michael le
Quern, on the 19th of October 1605. His father was a London merchant,
of a good Cheshire family; and his mother a Sussex lady, daughter of Mr
Paul Garraway of Lewis. His father died when he was very young, and his
mother marrying again shortly afterwards, Browne was left to the care
of his guardians, one of whom is said to have defrauded him out of some
of his property. He was educated at Winchester, and afterwards sent
to Oxford, to what is now Pembroke College, where he took his degree
of M.A. in 1629. Thereupon he commenced for a short time to practise
as a physician in Oxfordshire. But we soon find him growing tired of
this, and accompanying his father-in-law, Sir Thomas Dutton, on a
tour of inspection of the castles and forts in Ireland. We next hear
of Browne in the south of France, at Montpellier, then a celebrated
school of medicine, where he seems to have studied some little time.
From there he proceeded to Padua, one of the most famous of the Italian
universities, and noted for the views some of its members held on the
subjects of astronomy and necromancy. During his residence here, Browne
doubtless acquired some of his peculiar ideas on the science of the
heavens and the black art, and, what was more important, he learnt to
regard the Romanists with that abundant charity we find throughout his
works. From Padua, Browne went to Leyden, and this sudden change from
a most bigoted Roman Catholic to a most bigoted Protestant country
was not without its effect on his mind, as can be traced in his book.
Here he took the degree of Doctor of Medicine, and shortly afterwards
returned to England. Soon after his return, about the year 1635, he
published his “Religio Medici,” his first and greatest work, which
may be fairly regarded as the reflection of the mind of one who, in
spite of a strong intellect and vast erudition, was still prone to
superstition, but having

            “Through many cities strayed,
    Their customs, laws, and manners weighed,”

had obtained too large views of mankind to become a bigot.

After the publication of his book he settled at Norwich, where he soon
had an extensive practice as a physician. From hence there remains
little to be told of his life. In 1637 he was incorporated Doctor of
Medicine at Oxford; and in 1641 he married Dorothy the daughter of
Edward Mileham, of Burlingham in Norfolk, and had by her a family of
eleven children.

In 1646 he published his “Pseudodoxia Epidemica,” or Enquiries into
Vulgar Errors. The discovery of some Roman urns at Burnham in Norfolk,
led him in 1658 to write his “Hydriotaphia” (Urn-burial); he also
published at the same time “The Garden of Cyrus, or the Quincunxcial
Lozenge of the Ancients,” a curious work, but far inferior to his other
productions.

In 1665 he was elected an honorary Fellow of the College of Physicians,
“virtute et literis ornatissimus.”

Browne had always been a Royalist. In 1643 he had refused to subscribe
to the fund that was then being raised for regaining Newcastle. He
proved a happy exception to the almost proverbial neglect the Royalists
received from Charles II. in 1671, for when Charles was at Newmarket,
he came over to see Norwich, and conferred the honour of knighthood
on Browne. His reputation was now very great. Evelyn paid a visit to
Norwich for the express purpose of seeing him; and at length, on his
76th birthday (19th October 1682), he died, full of years and honours.

It was a striking coincidence that he who in his Letter to a Friend
had said that “in persons who outlive many years, and when there are
no less than 365 days to determine their lives in every year, that
the first day should mark the last, that the tail of the snake should
return into its mouth precisely at that time, and that they should wind
up upon the day of their nativity, is indeed a remarkable coincidence,
which, though astrology hath taken witty pains to solve, yet hath it
been very wary in making predictions of it,” should himself die on the
day of his birth.

