The Project Gutenberg eBook, Woman in Science, by John Augustine Zahm


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Woman in Science
       With an Introductory Chapter on Woman's Long Struggle for Things of the Mind


Author: John Augustine Zahm



Release Date: January 11, 2011  [eBook #34912]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1




The most famous men of Greece, married as well as unmarried, had their
"companions," many of whom were as distinguished for their
accomplishments as for their wit and beauty. Thus Epicurus had Leontium,
Menander Glycera, Isocrates Metaneira, Aristotle Herpyllis, and Plato
Archlanassa, while Aristippus, the philosopher, Diogenes, the cynic, and
Demosthenes, the great orator, each had a companion bearing the name of
Lais.[8] More than this. So strongly had many of the hetæræ impressed
themselves on the esthetic sense of the beauty-loving Greeks that not a
few of them had statues erected in their honor, especially in Athens and
Corinth, and thus shared in the honor that hitherto had been reserved
exclusively for the goddess of beauty and love, fair Aphrodite.

The hetæræ from Ionia and Ætolia were particularly conspicuous for their
intelligence and culture. And all of them, whencesoever they came,
enjoyed unrestricted liberty and, unlike the wives of the citizens of
Athens, had free access to the Portico and the Academy and the Lyceum,
and were permitted to attend the lectures of the philosophers on the
same footing as the men. Thus, to mention only a few, Thais was a pupil
of Alciphron, Nicarete of Stilpo, and Lasthenia of Plato.

And so keen were their intellects and so marked was their progress in
the most abstract studies, that many of them were recognized as the most
distinguished pupils of their masters. This accounts, in part, for the
popularity of their salons, at which were gathered the most eminent
statesmen, poets, artists, philosophers and orators of the day. The
nearest approach in modern times to such trysting-places, where beauty,
wit and talent found a congenial atmosphere, were the celebrated salons
of Ninon de Lenclos, Mlle. de l'Espinasse and Mme. du Deffand. At these
reunions were discussed, not only the news of the day, but also, and
especially, art, science, literature and politics, and always to the
advantage of both guests and hostesses.

Possessing such freedom and enjoying such splendid opportunities for
culture and intellectual advancement, it is not surprising that the
hetæræ played so remarkable a rôle in the social and civic life of
Greece, and that they were able to wield such influence over their
associates, and that they often attained even the highest royal honors.
Nor is it surprising to read in Plato's _Symposium_ the splendid tribute
which Socrates renders to Diotima of Mantinea, when, in discussing the
true nature of divine and eternal beauty, he speaks of her as his
teacher.

Many of the hetæræ were not only the models but also the inspirers of
the most famous painters and sculptors of antiquity. Thus, Lais was the
companion and inspirer of Apelles, the most noted painter of Greece,
while Phryne, said to have been the most beautiful woman who ever lived,
was the inspirer of the peerless Praxitiles, who, in reproducing her
form, succeeded in bequeathing to the world what was undoubtedly the
most lovely representation of "the human form divine" that ever came
from a sculptor's chisel.[9]

On account of the relations of the hetæræ, especially those of the
fourth and fifth centuries B.C., with the greatest men of their time,
the writers of antiquity thought them of sufficient importance to
preserve their history. One author has left us an account of no fewer
than one hundred and thirty-five of them. But, of all those whose names
have come down to us, by far the most noted, accomplished and
influential was the famous Aspasia of Miletus. In many respects she was
the most remarkable woman Greece ever produced. Of rare talent and
culture, of extraordinary tact and finesse, of a fascinating personality
combined with the grace and sensibility of her sex, together with a
masculine power of intellect, "this gracious Ionian," as has well been
said, "stands with Sappho on the pinnacle of Hellenic culture, each in
her own field the highest feminine representative of an esthetic race."

At an early age she won the passionate love of the great statesman
Pericles, after which she entered upon that marvelous career which
secured for her a place in the front rank of the most eminent women of
all time. "Her house became the resort of all the great men of Athens.
Socrates was often there. Phidias and Anaxagoras were intimate
acquaintances, and probably Sophocles and Euripides were in constant
attendance. Indeed, never had any woman such a salon in the whole
history of man. The greatest sculptor that ever lived, the grandest man
of all antiquity, philosophers and poets, sculptors and painters,
statesmen and historians, met each other and discussed congenial
subjects in her rooms. And probably hence has arisen the tradition that
she was the teacher of Socrates in philosophy and politics, and Pericles
in rhetoric. Her influence was such as to stimulate men to their best,
and they attributed to her all that was best in themselves. Aspasia
seems especially to have thought earnestly on the duties and destiny of
women. The cultivated men who thronged her assemblies had no hesitation
in breaking through the conventionalities of Athenian society, and
brought their wives to the parties of Aspasia; and she discussed with
them the duties of wives. She thought they should be something more than
mere mothers and housewives. She urged them to cultivate their minds,
and be in all respects fit companions for their husbands."[10]

She is said to have written some of the best speeches of Pericles--among
them his noted funeral oration over those who had died in battle before
the walls of Potidæa. As to Socrates, he himself explicitly refers to
her, in the _Memorabilia_, as his teacher. She is a notable character in
the Socratic dialogues and appears several times in those of Æschines,
while there is every reason to believe that she strongly influenced the
views of Plato, as expressed by him in the _Republic_ respecting the
equality of woman with man.

She was continually consulted regarding affairs of state, and her
influence in social and political matters was profound and far-reaching.
This is evidenced by the abuse heaped upon her by the comic dramatists
of the time. Referring to the ascendancy which she had over Pericles,
she was called Dejanira, the wife of Hercules; Hera, the queen of the
gods and wife of the Olympian Jove. It was asserted by her enemies that
the Samian war had been brought about at her instigation and that the
Peloponnesian war had been undertaken to avenge an insult which had been
offered her. These and similar statements which, when not absurd, were
greatly exaggerated, show the boundless influence she wielded over
Pericles, and what an important part she took in the government of
Greece in the zenith of its glory.

But, however great her influence, we are warranted in asserting that it
was never exercised in an illegitimate manner. She was ever, as history
informs us, the good, the wise, the learned, the eloquent Aspasia. It
was her goodness, her wisdom, her rare and varied accomplishments, her
clear insight and noble purposes that gave her the wonderful power she
possessed and which enabled her, probably more than any one person, to
make the age of Pericles not only the most brilliant age of Greek
history, but also the most brilliant age of all time.[11]

But, notwithstanding the beneficent influence which Aspasia ever exerted
on those about her, notwithstanding the heroic efforts she had made to
liberate her own sex from the restrictions that had so long harassed and
degraded it, the wives and daughters of the citizens of Athens were
still kept in almost absolute seclusion and denied the opportunities of
mental culture which were so generously accorded the free-born hetæræ
from Asia Minor and the islands of the Ægean. Socrates, as we learn from
Xenophon, asserted woman's equality with man, while Plato taught that
mentally there was no essential difference between man and woman. He
concluded, accordingly, that women of talent should have the same
educational advantages as men. In _The Republic_ as well as in the
_Laws_, when he refers to education--which he would make compulsory for
"all and sundry, as far as possible"--his views are far in advance of
those which have been entertained until the last half century. He would
have girls as well as boys thoroughly instructed in music and
gymnastic--"music for the mind and gymnastic for the body."[12]

In the _Laws_ he contends that "women ought to share, as far as
possible, in education and in other ways with men. For consider:--if
women do not share in their whole life with men, then they must have
some other order of life."

Again he asserts "Nothing can be more absurd than the practice which
prevails in our own country of men and women not following the same
pursuits with all their strength and with one mind, for thus the state,
instead of being a whole, is reduced to a half."[13]

In _The Republic_ he expresses the same idea when he affirms that "the
gifts of nature are alike diffused in both"--men and women--"all the
pursuits of men are the pursuits of women."[14]

These opinions of Socrates and Plato are so at variance with those of
their contemporaries, and so contrary to the custom that then obtained
of excluding all but free-born hetæræ from the advantages of education
and culture, that we cannot but think that they were due to the profound
influence which had been exercised directly or indirectly by Aspasia on
both of these great philosophers. Be this as it may, neither the efforts
of Aspasia nor the teachings of Socrates and Plato were able to remove
the bars to intellectual development from which the women of Greece had
so long suffered. A change in customs and laws concerning the rigid,
oriental seclusion of women did not come until much later, and then it
was under a new régime--that of the Cæsars--while complete equality of
men and women in school and college was not recognized until long
centuries afterward.

It is interesting to speculate regarding what Greece would have become
had she developed her women as she developed her men. Never in the
history of the world were there in any one city so many eminent
men--poets, orators, statesmen, painters, sculptors, architects,
philosophers--as in Athens, and yet not a single native-born Athenian
woman ever attained the least distinction in any department of art or
science or literature. We cannot conceive for a moment that Greece's
fertility in great men and barrenness in great women was due to the fact
that the mothers of such illustrious men were ordinary housewives and
entirely devoid of the talent and genius which gave immortality to their
distinguished sons. The careers of Aspasia and the achievements of
Sappho, Corinna, Myrtides, Erinna, Praxilla, Telesilla, Myrus, Anytæ and
Nossidis, Theano and her daughter, to mention no others, absolutely
preclude such an assumption.

The women in Greece, there can be no doubt about it, were as richly
endowed by nature as were the men, and only lacked the opportunities
that men enjoyed to achieve, in every sphere of intellectual activity, a
corresponding measure of success. They were extraordinary types, these
women of ancient Greece; for among them we find the dignified Roman
matron, the chatelaine of the Middle Ages, the brilliant woman of the
Renaissance and the cultured mistress of the French _salon_. But all
their talent, power and genius counted for naught.

Had the civilization of Greece been a woman's civilization, as well as a
man's civilization, had there been a federation of all the Greek states,
as Aspasia seems to have striven for, instead of a number of small and
independent city-states; had the women of Hellas been allowed the same
liberty of action in intellectual work as was granted to the Italian
women during and after the revival of letters, and had they been
encouraged to develop all their latent powers that were so
systematically suppressed, and to work in unison with the men for the
welfare and advancement of a united nation, it is difficult to imagine
what a dazzling intellectual zenith a supremely gifted people, "full
summ'd in all their powers," would have attained. Their capacity for
work and for achieving great things would have been doubled and their
power as a political organization would have been practically
irresistible.

"We are the only women that bring forth men," said Gorgo, the wife of
Leonidas. The Spartan mothers, who had more of liberty than their
Athenian sisters, did, indeed, bring forth warriors of undying renown;
but it was the mothers of Athens who, notwithstanding all their
grievous disabilities, gave to the world all the greatest masters in
art, literature, and philosophy--the men who through the ages have been
the leaders and the teachers of humanity, and who seem destined to hold
their exalted position until the end of time.

The failure of the men of Greece to avail themselves of the immense
potential power, which they always kept latent in their women, was the
occasion of a terrible nemesis in the end. For this failure, coupled
with the frightful license introduced by a class of educated women, like
the hetæræ, without legal status or domestic ties, and the wave of
corruption that subsequently followed the advent of the countless
dissolute women who flocked to the Hellenic cities from every part of
the East, paved the way for the nation's downfall and for its ultimate
conquest by the resistless Roman legions that swept the once glorious
but ill-fated country of Pericles and Aspasia.


WOMAN AND EDUCATION IN ANCIENT ROME

The condition of women in Rome, especially from 150 B.C. to 150 A.D.,
was quite different from what it was in Athens, even during her palmiest
days. Owing to the lack of authentic documents we know but little of the
history of the Roman people during the first five hundred years of their
existence, but we do know that during this period many and important
changes were effected regarding the social and civil status of women.

In the first place the Roman matron had much more freedom than was
accorded the Greek wife during the age of Pericles. Far from being kept
in oriental seclusion, like her Athenian sister, she was at liberty to
receive and dine with the friends of her husband, and to appear in
public whenever she desired. She went to the theater and the Forum; she
took part in all reputable entertainment, whether public or private.
Besides this, she had more and greater legal rights than Greek women
had ever known, and was treated rather as the peer and companion of man
than as his toy or his slave.

Besides this, foreign women were never so conspicuous in Rome as in
Athens. Even after Greece had become a Roman province, and after _Græcia
capta Romam cepit_--when Greek ideas and Greek customs were introduced
into the capital of the Roman world--it was still the Roman matron that
was supreme. And, although many Greek women, some of them of rare beauty
and culture, found their way to Rome, especially under the empire, they
were always kept in the background and never succeeded in achieving
anything approaching the ascendancy which distinguished them during the
time of Aspasia. Their influence in literature and politics was almost
_nil_.

In the case of the women of Rome, on the contrary, it may well be
questioned whether woman has ever wielded a greater influence than she
did during the three centuries that followed the reign of Augustus. But
she did not attain to this position of preëminence without a long and
bitter struggle. Every advance toward the goal of social and
intellectual equality was strenuously contested by the men, who wished
to limit the activities of their wives to the spindle, the distaff and
the loom and the other occupations of the household. For, as in Greece,
the generally accepted view was that woman, in the language of Gibbon,
"was created to please and obey. She was never supposed to have reached
the age of reason or experience." And her noblest epitaph, it was
averred, was couched in the following words:

     "She was gentle, pious, loved her husband, was skillful at
     the loom and a good housekeeper."[15]

As to her mental work, far from being considered on its own merits or as
a factor in the world's growth, it was flouted as

    "Mere woman's work
    Expressing the comparative respect
    Which means the absolute scorn."

As early as 450 B.C., when the laws of the Twelve Tables were
promulgated, the girls of Rome received instruction in reading, writing
and arithmetic. "Up before dawn, with a lamp to light the way, and an
attendant to carry her satchel, the little Roman maiden of seven years,
or over, would trudge off to the portico where the schoolmaster wielded
his rod.[16] For some years this life continued, with but few holidays,
and those far between, until she attained some proficiency in the
rudiments. Then, most probably, her education in the scholastic sense
came to an end. Her brothers and boy schoolmates, if their parents
wished it, could proceed from the primary school to the secondary, where
geography, history and ethics were taught; where the art of elocution
was assiduously practiced and the works of the great Greek and Roman
poets were carefully read and expounded; but it was enough for the girl
to have learned how to read, write and cipher; she had then to learn her
domestic duties."[17]

With the extension of the empire and the consequent enormous increase in
wealth and the rapid progress in social and intellectual freedom, there
was a notable change in the character of the education given to women,
at least to those of the wealthier and patrician families. This was, in
great measure, due to the wave of Hellenism which, shortly after the
conquest of Greece, broke upon the Roman capital with such irresistible
force. To the large and rapidly increasing number of women of keen
intellect and lofty aspirations, whose minds had hitherto been confined
to the comparatively barren field of Roman letters, the splendid
creations of Greek genius came as a revelation. To become thoroughly
versed in Greek poetry and proficient in the teachings of Greek
philosophy was the ambition of scores of Roman women, who soon became
noted for the extent and variety of their attainments, as well as for
their rare culture and charming personality.

Among the pioneers of the intellectual movement in Rome, and one of the
most beautiful types of the learned women of her time, was the
celebrated daughter of the elder Scipio Africanus--Cornelia, mother of
the Gracchi. She is famous on account of her devotion to her two sons,
Tiberius and Caius. She was their teacher; and it was her educated and
refined mind that, more than anything else, contributed to the formation
of those splendid characters for which they were so highly esteemed by
their countrymen. Plutarch informs us that these noble sons of a noble
mother "were brought up by her so carefully that they became beyond
dispute the most accomplished of Roman youth; and, thus, they owed
perhaps more to their excellent upbringing than to their natural
parts."[18] One is not surprised to learn that this noble lady was
almost idolized by the Romans, and that they erected a statue to her
with the inscription, "Cornelia, Mother of the Gracchi."

Scarcely less distinguished and accomplished was another Cornelia, the
wife of Pompey, the Great. "Besides her youthful beauty," writes
Plutarch, in his _Life of Pompey_, "she possessed other charms, for she
was well versed in literature, in playing on the lyre, and in geometry,
and she had been used to listen to philosophical discourses with profit.
Besides this, she had a disposition free from all affectation and
display of pedantry--blemishes which such acquirements usually breed in
women."[19]

Then there was the cultured and devoted Aurelia, the mother of Julius
Cæsar. It is safe to say that this eminent man was as much indebted to
his mother for his success and greatness as were Tiberius and Caius
Gracchus to the benign influence and careful teachings of the gentle and
virtuous Cornelia. Highly educated and of commanding personalities, both
these women, like many others of their time, contributed much to the
making of Roman history by the success they achieved in molding the
characters of some of the greatest men of their own or of any age.

It is a splendid tribute that Cicero, in his _Orator_, pays to Lælia
when he tells of the purity of her language and the charm of her
conversation. "When I listen," he declares, "to my mother-in-law,
Lælia--for women preserve the traditional purity of accent the best
because, being limited in their intercourse with the multitude, they
retain their early impressions--I could imagine that I hear Plautus or
Nævius speaking, the pronunciation is so plain and simple, so perfectly
free from all affectation and display; from which I infer that such was
the accent of her father and his ancestors--not harsh like the
pronunciation to which I have just referred, not broad nor rustic nor
rugged, but terse, smooth and flowing."[20]

These are a few of the cultured and learned women who shed glory on
their country by the refining influence which they exerted in the quiet
and unostentatious precincts of the family circle. But there were others
who chose a wider field for their activities, and who, by reason of
their unerring judgment, well-poised and highly cultivated minds, had so
won the confidence of the nation's greatest leaders that they were
frequently consulted on important affairs of state. Thus, Cicero tells
us of an interview which he had at Antium with Brutus and Cassius.
Besides the men, there were present on this occasion three women, who
took an active part in the discussion. These were Servilia, the mother
of Brutus, Porcia, the wife of Brutus and the daughter of Cato, and
Tertulla, the wife of Cassius and sister of Brutus. The views of the
women were not without effect, and so confident was Servilia of her
power that she engaged to have a certain clause in one of the decrees of
the Senate expunged. This is but one of many similar instances which
might be adduced from the lives of the women of Rome who took an active
part in politics. As we learn from Tacitus, their counsels and
assistance were considered of peculiar value by the Commonwealth. For,
when some of the sterner old moralists wished to exclude women from all
participation in public affairs, the Senate, after a heated debate,
decided by a large majority that the coöperation of women in questions
of administration, far from being a menace, as some contended, was so
beneficial to the state that it should be continued.

Among other noteworthy makers of Roman history, besides those just
mentioned, is Livia, the wife of Augustus and the mother of Tiberius. So
great was her influence and so persistent was her activity in government
affairs, that it is sometimes asserted that she was the prime mover of
most of the public acts of both these rulers. This woman, whom Ovid
describes as having the features of Venus and the manner of Juno, and
who, he declares, "held her head above all vices," was credited with
having the benevolence of Ceres, the purity of Diana and the wisdom and
craft of Minerva--"a woman," as was said by one of her contemporaries,
"in all things more comparable to the gods than to men, who knew how to
use her power so as to turn away peril and advance the most deserving."

