The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Origin and Growth of the Healing Art, by
Edward Berdoe


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Origin and Growth of the Healing Art
       A Popular History of Medicine in All Ages and Countries


Author: Edward Berdoe



Release Date: April 22, 2019  [eBook #59331]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8




Le Clerc thought that the stories of animals teaching men the use of
plants, herbs, etc., meant that men tried them first upon animals
before using them for food or medicine. There is no probability of
this having been so. If men had observed with Linnæus that horses eat
aconite with impunity, and had in consequence eaten it themselves,
the result would have been fatal. Birds and herbivorous animals eat
belladonna with impunity,[8] and it has very little effect on horses
and donkeys. Goats, sheep, and horses are said by Dr. Ringer to eat
hemlock without ill effects, yet it poisoned Socrates. Henbane has
little or no effect on sheep, cows, and pigs. Ipecacuanha does not
cause vomiting in rabbits,[9] and so on.

Probably from the earliest times man would be led to observe the
behaviour of animals when suffering from disease or injury. If he could
not learn much from them in the way of medicine, they could teach him
many useful arts. In savage man we must seek the beginnings of our
civilization, and it is in the lowest tribes and those which have not
yet felt the influences of superior races that we must search for the
most primitive forms of medical ideas and the earliest theories and
treatment of disease.

Sir John Lubbock says:[10] “It is a common opinion that savages are,
as a general rule, only the miserable remnants of nations once more
civilized; but although there are some well-established cases of
natural decay, there is no scientific evidence which would justify us
in asserting that this applies to savages in general.”

Dr. E. B. Tylor, in his fascinating work on _Primitive Culture_,
says:[11] “The thesis which I venture to sustain, within limits, is
simply this—that the savage state in some measure represents an early
condition of mankind, out of which the higher culture has gradually
been developed or evolved by processes still in regular operation
as of old, the result showing that, on the whole, progress has far
prevailed over relapse. On this proposition the main tendency of human
society during its long term of existence has been to pass from a
savage to a civilized state. It is mere matter of chronicle that modern
civilization is a development of mediæval civilization, which again is
a development from civilization of the order represented in Greece,
Assyria, or Egypt. Then the higher culture being clearly traced back to
what may be called the middle culture, the question which remains is,
whether this middle culture may be traced back to the lower culture,
that is, to savagery.”

Providing we can find our savage pure and uncontaminated, it matters
little where we seek him; north, south, east, or west, he will be
practically the same for our purpose.

Dr. Robertson says: “If we suppose two tribes, though placed in the
most remote regions of the globe, to live in a climate nearly of the
same temperature, to be in the same state of society, and to resemble
each other in the degree of their improvement, they must feel the same
wants, and exert the same endeavours to supply them.... In every part
of the earth the progress of man has been nearly the same, and we
can trace him in his career from the rude simplicity of savage life,
until he attains the industry, the arts, and the elegance of polished
society.”[12]

Writing of the primitive folk, the Eastern Inoits, Elie Reclus tells us
that,[13] “shut away from the rest of the world by their barriers of
ice, the Esquimaux, more than any other people, have remained outside
foreign influences, outside the civilization whose contact shatters and
transforms. They have been readily perceived by prehistoric science
to offer an intermediate type between man as he is and man as he was
in bygone ages. When first visited, they were in the very midst of
the stone and bone epoch,[14] just as were the Guanches when they
were discovered; their iron and steel are recent, almost contemporary
importations. The lives of Europeans of the Glacial period cannot have
been very different from those led amongst their snow-fields by the
Inoits of to-day.”




CHAPTER II.

ANIMISM.

 Who discovered our Medicines?—Anthropology can assist us to answer
 the Question.—The Priest and the Medicine-man originally one.—Disease
 the Work of Magic.—Origin of our Ideas of the Soul and Future
 Life.—Disease-demons.


Cardinal Newman, in his sermon on “The World’s Benefactors,” asks, “Who
was the first cultivator of corn? Who first tamed and domesticated the
animals whose strength we use, and whom we make our food? Or who first
discovered the medicinal herbs, which from the earliest times have been
our resource against disease? If it was mortal man who thus looked
through the vegetable and animal worlds, and discriminated between the
useful and the worthless, his name is unknown to the millions whom he
has thus benefited.

“It is notorious that those who first suggest the most happy inventions
and open a way to the secret stores of nature; those who weary
themselves in the search after truth; strike out momentous principles
of action; painfully force upon their contemporaries the adoption of
beneficial measures; or, again, are the original cause of the chief
events in national history,—are commonly supplanted, as regards
celebrity and reward, by inferior men. Their works are not called after
them, nor the arts and systems which they have given the world. Their
schools are usurped by strangers, and their maxims of wisdom circulate
among the children of their people, forming perhaps a nation’s
character, but not embalming in their own immortality the names of
their original authors.”

The reflection is an old one; the son of Sirach said, “And some there
be, which have no memorial; who are perished, as though they had never
been; and are become as though they had never been born; and their
children after them. But these were merciful men, whose righteousness
hath not been forgotten” (_Ecclesiasticus_ xliv. 9, 10). Cardinal
Newman has framed his question, so far as the healing art is concerned,
in a manner to which it is impossible to make a satisfactory answer. No
one man first discovered the medicinal herbs; probably the discovery
of all the virtues of a single one of them was not the work of any
individual. No man “looked through the vegetable and animal worlds
and discriminated between the useful and the worthless”; all this
has been the work of ages, and is the outcome of the experience of
thousands of investigators. The medical arts have played so important
a part in the development of our civilization, that they constitute a
branch of study second to none in utility and interest to those who
would know something of the work of the world’s benefactors. Probably
at no period in the world’s history have medical men occupied a more
honourable or a more prominent position than they do at the present
time, and it would almost seem that the rewards which an ignorant or
ungrateful civilization denied in the past to medical men are now being
bestowed on those who in these latter days have been so fortunate as to
inherit the traditions and the acquirements of a forgotten ancestry of
truth-seekers and students of the mysteries of nature. As the earliest
races of mankind passed by slow degrees from a state of savagery to
the primitive civilizations, we must seek for the beginnings of the
medical arts in the representatives of the ancient barbarisms which are
to be found to-day in the aborigines of Central Africa and the islands
of Australasian seas. The intimate connection which exists between
the magician, the sorcerer, and the “medicine man” of the present day
serves to illustrate how the priest, the magician, and the physician
of the past were so frequently combined in a single individual, and to
explain how the mysteries of religion were so generally connected with
those of medicine.

Professor Tylor has explained how death and all forms of disease
were attributed to magic, the essence of which is the belief in the
influence of the spirits of dead men. This belief is termed Animism,
and Mr. Tylor says: “Animism characterizes tribes very low in the scale
of humanity, and thence ascends, deeply modified in its transmission,
but from first to last preserving an unbroken continuity, into the
midst of high culture. Animism is the groundwork of the philosophy
of religion, from that of the savages up to that of civilized men;
but although it may at first seem to afford but a meagre and bare
definition of a minimum of religion, it will be found practically
sufficient; for where the roots are, the branches will generally
be produced. The theory of animism divides into two great dogmas,
forming parts of one consistent doctrine: first, concerning souls of
individual creatures, capable of continued existence after death;
second, concerning other spirits, upward to the rank of powerful
deities. Spiritual beings are held to affect or control the events of
the material world, and man’s life here and hereafter; and it being
considered that they hold intercourse with men and receive pleasure or
displeasure from human actions, the belief in their existence leads
naturally, sooner or later, to active reverence and propitiation.”
There is no doubt that the belief in the soul and in the existence of
the spirits of the departed in another world arose from dreams. When
the savage in his sleep held converse, as it seemed to him, with the
actual forms of his departed relatives and friends, the most natural
thing imaginable would be the belief that these persons actually
existed in a spiritual shape in some other world than the material
one in which he existed. Those who dreamed most frequently and most
vividly, and were able to describe their visions most clearly, would
naturally strive to interpret their meaning, and would become, to
their grosser and less poetical brethren, more important personages,
and be considered as in closer converse with the spiritual world than
themselves. Thus, in process of time, the seer, the prophet, and the
magician would be evolved.

How did primitive man come by his ideas? When he saw the effects of a
power, he could only make guesses at the cause; he could only speak
of it by some such terms as he would use concerning a human agent. He
saw the effects of fire, and personified the cause. With the Hindus
Agni was the giver of light and warmth, and so of the life of plants,
of animals, and of men; and so with thunder, lightning, and storm,
primitive man looked upon these phenomena as the conflicts of beings
higher and more powerful than himself. Thus it was that the ancient
people of India formed their conceptions of the storm-gods, the Maruts,
_i.e._ the Smashers. Amongst the Esthonians, as Max Müller tells
us,[15] prayers were addressed to thunder and rain as late as the
seventeenth century. “Dear Thunder, push elsewhere all the thick black
clouds. Holy Thunder, guard our seed-field.” (This same thunder-god,
_Perkuna_, says Max Müller, was the god _Parganya_, who was invoked
in India a thousand years before Alexander’s expedition.) We say _it_
rains, _it_ thunders. Primitive folk said the rain-god poured out his
buckets, the thunder-god was angry.

What did primitive man think when he observed the germination of seeds;
the chick coming out of the egg; the butterfly bursting from the
chrysalis; the shadow which everywhere accompanies the man; the shadows
of the tree; the leaves which vibrate in the breeze; when he heard
the roaring of the wind; the moaning of the storm, and the strange,
mysterious echo which, plainly as he heard it, ceased as he approached
the mountain-side which he conceived to be its home? He could but
believe that all nature was living, like himself; and that, as he could
not understand what he saw in the seed, the egg, the chrysalis, or the
shadow, so all nature was full of mystery, of a life that he in vain
would try to comprehend. Many savages regard their own shadows as one
of their two souls,—a soul which is always watching their actions, and
ready to bear witness against them. How should it be otherwise with
them? The shadow is a reality to the savage, and so is the echo. The
ship which visits his shores, the watch and the compass, which he sees
for the first time, are alive; they move, they must be living!

Mr. Tylor, in his chapter on Animism, in his _Primitive Culture_, says
(vol. ii. pp. 124, 125):—

“As in normal conditions the man’s soul, inhabiting his body, is held
to give it life, to think, speak, and act through it, so an adaptation
of the self-same principle explains abnormal conditions of body or
mind, by considering the new symptoms as due to the operation of a
second soul-like being, a strange spirit. The possessed man, tossed and
shaken in fever, pained and wrenched as though some live creature were
tearing or twisting him within, pining as though it were devouring his
vitals day by day, rationally finds a personal spiritual cause for his
sufferings. In hideous dreams he may even sometimes see the very ghost
or nightmare-fiend that plagues him. Especially when the mysterious,
unseen power throws him helpless to the ground, jerks and writhes him
in convulsions, makes him leap upon the bystanders with a giant’s
strength and a wild beast’s ferocity, impels him, with distorted face
and frantic gesture, and voice not his own, nor seemingly even human,
to pour forth wild incoherent raving, or with thought and eloquence
beyond his sober faculties, to command, to counsel, to foretell—such a
one seems to those who watch him, and even to himself, to have become
the mere instrument of a spirit which has seized him or entered into
him—a possessing demon in whose personality the patient believes so
implicitly that he often imagines a personal name for it, which it
can declare when it speaks in its own voice and character through his
organs of speech; at last, quitting the medium’s spent and jaded body,
the intruding spirit departs as it came. This is the savage theory
of demoniacal possession and obsession, which has been for ages, and
still remains, the dominant theory of disease and inspiration among
the lower races. It is obviously based on an animistic interpretation,
most genuine and rational in its proper place in man’s intellectual
history, of the natural symptoms of the cases. The general doctrine
of disease-spirits and oracle-spirits appears to have its earliest,
broadest, and most consistent position within the limits of savagery.
When we have gained a clear idea of it in this its original home, we
shall be able to trace it along from grade to grade of civilization,
breaking away piecemeal under the influence of new medical theories,
yet sometimes expanding in revival, and, at least, in lingering
survival holding its place into the midst of our modern life. The
possession-theory is not merely known to us by the statements of those
who describe diseases in accordance with it. Disease being accounted
for by attacks of spirits, it naturally follows that to get rid of
these spirits is the proper means of cure. Thus the practices of the
exorcist appear side by side with the doctrine of possession, from its
first appearance in savagery to its survival in modern civilization;
and nothing could display more vividly the conception of a disease or
a mental affliction as caused by a personal spiritual being than the
proceedings of the exorcist who talks to it, coaxes or threatens it,
makes offerings to it, entices or drives it out of the patient’s body,
and induces it to take up its abode in some other.”




CHAPTER III.

SAVAGE THEORIES OF DISEASE.

Demoniacal.—Witchcraft.—Offended Dead Persons.


We find amongst savages three chief theories of disease; that it is
caused by—

I. The anger of an offended demon.

II. Witchcraft, or

III. Offended dead persons.


I. ANGER OF OFFENDED DEMONS.

Disease and death are set down to the influences of spirits in the
Australian-Tasmanian district, where demons are held to have the
power of creeping into men’s bodies, to eat up their livers, and
sometimes to work the wicked will of a sorcerer by inflicting blows
with a club on the back of the victim’s neck.[16] The Mantira, a low
race of the Malay Peninsula, believe in the theory of disease-spirits
in its extreme form; their spirits cause all sorts of ailments. The
“Hantu Kalumbahan” causes small-pox; the “Hantu Kamang” brings on
inflammation and swelling of the hands and feet; the blood which flows
from wounds is due to the “Hantu-pari,” which fastens on the wound
and sucks. So many diseases, so many Hantus. If a new malady were to
appear amongst the tribes, a new Hantu would be named as its cause.[17]
When small-pox breaks out amongst these people, they place thorns and
brush in the paths to keep the demons away. The Khonds of Orissa try
to defend themselves against the goddess of small-pox, Jugah Pensu,
in the same way. Among the Dayaks of Borneo, to have been ill is to
have been smitten by a spirit; invisible spirits inflict invisible
wounds with invisible spears, or they enter bodies and make them mad.
Disease-spirits in the Indian Archipelago are conciliated by presents
and dances. In Polynesia, every sickness is set down to deities which
have been offended, or which have been urged to afflict the sufferer by
their enemies.[18] In New Zealand disease is supposed to be due to a
baby, or undeveloped spirit, which is gnawing the patient’s body. Those
who endeavour to charm it away persuade it to get upon a flax-stalk and
go home. Each part of the body is the particular region of the spirit
whose office it is to afflict it.[19]

The Prairie Indians treat all diseases in the same way, as they must
all have been caused by one evil spirit.[20]

Among the Betschvaria disease may be averted if a painted stone or
a crossbar smeared with medicine be set up near the entrance of the
residence or approach to a town.[21]

Amongst the Bodo and Dhimal peoples, when the exorcist is called to
a sick man he sets thirteen loaves round him, to represent the gods,
one of whom he must have offended; then he prays to the deity, holding
a pendulum by a string. The offended god is supposed to cause the
pendulum to swing towards his loaf.[22]

The New Zealanders had a separate demon for each part of the body
to cause disease. Tonga caused headache and sickness; Moko-Tiki was
responsible for chest pains, and so on.[23]

The Karens of Burmah and the Zulus both say, “The rainbow is disease.
If it rests on a man, something will happen to him.”[24] “The rainbow
has come to drink wells.” They say, “Look out; some one or other will
come violently by an evil death.”

The Tasmanians lay their sick round a corpse on the funeral pile, that
the dead may come in the night and take out the devils that cause the
diseases.[25]

The Zulus believe that spirits, when angry, seize a living man’s body
and inflict disease and death, and when kindly disposed give health and
cattle. In Madagascar, Mr. Tylor tells us, the spirits of the Vazimbas,
the aborigines of the island, inflict diseases, and the Malagasy
accounts for all sorts of mysterious complaints by the supposition
that he has given offence to some Vazimba. The Gold Coast negroes
believe that ghosts plague the living and cause sickness. The Dayaks
of Borneo think that the souls of men enter the trunks of trees, and
the Hindus hold that plants are sometimes the homes of the spirits of
the departed. The Santals of Bengal believe that the spirits of the
good enter into fruit-bearing trees.[26] It is but another step to the
belief that beneficent medicinal plants are tenanted by good spirits,
and poisonous plants by evil spirits. The Malays have a special demon
for each kind of disease; one for small-pox, another for swellings, and
so on.[27]

The Dayaks of Borneo acknowledge a supreme God, although, as we have
said, they attribute all kinds of diseases and calamities to the
malignity of evil spirits. Their system of medicine consists in the
application of appropriate charms or the offering of conciliatory
sacrifices.[28] Yet they are an intelligent and highly capable race,
and their steel instruments far surpass European wares in strength and
fineness of edge.[29]

