The Project Gutenberg EBook of Merck's 1899 Manual, by Merck & Co.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Merck's 1899 Manual

Author: Merck & Co.

Release Date: December 24, 2012 [EBook #41697]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



Acids: before meals, or as an acid wine during meals. For acid
eructations, especially of sulphuretted hydrogen.

Acid, Carbolic: to stop fermentation or to relieve an irritable
condition of the stomach.

Alkalies: after meals, best as bicarbonates; with flatulence give
magnesia if there is constipation; lime water if there is diarrhea.

Ammonia: in headache from acidity.

Ammonium Bicarbonate.

Atropine: for gastric hypersecretion.

Bismuth: in gastritis due to chronic abscess or chronic alcoholism.
Very well combined with arsenic in very chronic cases, with hydrocyanic
acid in more acute cases.

Calcium Carbonate, precipitated.

Cerium Oxalate.

Charcoal: as biscuits.

Creosote: same as carbolic acid.

Ichthalbin.

Ipecacuanha: in small doses in pregnancy where flatulence and acidity
are both present.

Kino: useful along with opium.

Lead Acetate: in gastric catarrh and pyrosis.

Lime Water.

Liquor Potassæ: useful for both gastric and urinary acidity.

Magnesium Carbonate.

Magnesium Oxide.

Manganese Dioxide: sometimes relieves, probably acting like charcoal.

Mercury: When liver deranged and stools pale.

Nux Vomica: in small doses before meals, especially in pregnancy, or in
chronic alcoholism.

Potassium Bitartrate.

Potassium Carbonate.

Pulsatilla: every four hours in hot water.

Silver Nitrate: same as silver oxide.

Silver Oxide: especially useful when acidity is accompanied by
neuralgic pains in stomach.

Sulphurous Acid: if associated with the vomiting of a pasty material,
presence of sarcinæ.

Tannalbin: when there is abundance of mucus.

Tannic Acid: in acidity associated with chronic catarrh and flatulence.
Glycerin 1 minim, tannic acid 4 grn., as pill.


~Acne.~

Adeps Lanæ: topically.

Alkaline lotions: when skin is greasy and follicles are black and
prominent.

Aristol.

Arsenic: in chronic acne; generally, though not always, prevents the
acne from bromide or iodide of potassium.

Belladonna: as local application to check a too abundant secretion.

Berberis: for acne of girls at puberty.

Bismuth: as ointment or powder. In acne rosacea, if acute.

Borax: solution very useful.

Cajeput Oil: as stimulant in acne rosacea.

Calcium Sulphide: same as sulphur. For internal use.

Chrysarobin.

Coca.

Cod-Liver Oil.

Copper.

Electricity.

Euresol.

Europhen.

Gaduol: internally, in scrofulous and hectic cases.

Glycerin: both locally and internally.

Hydrastine Hydrochlorate: as lotion.

Hydrastis.

Ichthalbin: internally.

Ichthyol: externally.

Iodide of Sulphur: in all stages of the disease.

Iodine: is of doubtful value.

Iodole: topically.

Levico Water.

Liquor Hydrarg. Pernitratis: a single drop on an indurated pustule will
destroy without a scar.

Magnesium Sulphate.

Mercurials: internally.

Mercury Nitrate: solution topically.

Mercury Bichloride: solution as wash.

Mercury Iodide, red.

Naphtol.

Nitric Acid.

Perosmic Acid.

Phosphorus: in chronic cases in place of arsenic. The phosphates and
hypo-phosphites are safer and more valuable. The latter in acne
indurata.

Potassium Bromide: sometimes useful in moderate doses in obstinate
cases. This salt and the Iodide very often cause acne when taken
continuously.

Potassium Chlorate.

Quinine.

Resorcin.

Sand: friction with, useful.

Sodium Bicarbonate.

Strontium Iodide.

Sulphur: internally, and externally as a lotion or ointment, most
valuable agent.

Thymol.

Water: Hot sponging several times a day.

Zinc Salts.


~Actinomycosis.~

Potassium Iodide.

Sodium Salicylate.


~Addison's Disease.~

Arsenic.

Glycerin: in full doses.

Iron: with antiemetics and tonics.

Iron Glycerinophosphate.

Levico Water.

Phosphorus.

Skimmed Milk: as diet.

Sozoiodole-Potassium.


~Adenitis.~--_See also, Glandular Affections._

Calcium Phosphate: internally.

Calcium Sulphide: internally.

Carbon Disulphide.

Cod-Liver Oil: internally.

Gaduol: internally.

Ichthalbin: internally.

Ichthyol: topically as antiphlogistic.

Iodole: as cicatrizant.

Sozoiodole-Potassium: as granulator.


~Adynamia.~--_See also, Anemia, Convalescence, Neurasthenia._

Acid, Hydriodic.

Acid, Hydrochloric.

Acid, Nitric.

Alcohol.

Arsenic: for swelled feet of old or weakly persons with weak heart.

Calcium Phosphate.

Caffeine.

Camphor.

Cinchona Alkaloids and their salts.

Capsicum.

Digitalis.

Eucalyptol.

Hemogallol.

Hydrastine.

Hydrogen Peroxide.

Iron.

Iron Valerianate.

Levico Water.

Nux Vomica: in dipsomaniacs.

Potassium Chlorate.

Quinine.

Sanguinarine.

Solut. Ammonium Acetate.

Turpentine Oil.

Urethane.

Valerian.


~After-Pains.~--_See also, Lactation._

Actæa Racemosa: it restores the lochia in cases of sudden suppression
and removes the symptoms.

Amyl Nitrite.

Belladonna: as ointment.

Camphor: 10 grn. with 1/8 grn. morphine.

Chloral: in large doses arrests the pains; contra-indicated in feeble
action of the heart.

Chloroform: liniment to abdomen, along with soap liniment.

Cimicifuga: same as ergot.

Copper Arsenite.

Ergot: to keep the uterus constantly contracted and prevent
accumulation of clots and the consequent pain.

Gelsemium: stops pains when in doses sufficient to produce its
physiological effect.

Morphine: hypodermically very useful, 1/6 to 1/4 grn. with 1/100 grn.
atropine.

Opium: the same as morphine.

Pilocarpine: in agalactia.

Poultices: warm, to hypogastrium, relieve.

Quinine: 5 to 10 gr. night and morning, in neuralgic after-pains which
do not yield to opiates.

Viburnum.


~Ague.~--_See Intermittent Fever._


~Albuminuria.~--_See also, Bright's Disease, Nephritis._

Acid, Gallic: lessens albumen and hematuria.

Aconite: to lower a high temperature; and in the onset of acute
nephritis in scarlet fever.

Alcohol: hurtful in acute stage; useful when a slight trace of albumen
is persistent.

Alkaline Diuretics: to prevent formation of fibrinous plugs in the
renal tubules.

Aqua Calcis: in large doses has been found to increase the urine, and
decrease the albumen.

Arsenic: beneficial in very chronic cases. Albumen will return if the
use of the drug be stopped.

Baths: warm water and hot air and Turkish, to increase action of skin
after dropsy or uremic symptoms have appeared.

Belladonna: has been used to diminish the chronic inflammatory
condition left by an acute attack.

Broom: as diuretic in chronic renal disease.

Caffeine: to increase secretion of solids, especially in cases
dependent on cardiac disease. Should be combined with digitalis. Very
useful in chronic Bright's disease; should be used with great caution
in the acute stage.

Calcium Benzoate.

Cannabis Indica: as diuretic in hematuria.

Cantharides: 1 min. of tincture every three hours, when acute stage has
passed off, to stop hematuria.

Chimaphila: as a diuretic.

Cod-Liver Oil: as a tonic.

Copaiba: to remove ascites and albuminuria dependent on cardiac or
chronic Bright's disease, and in some cases of hematuria.

Counter-Irritation: dry cupping most useful when tendency to uremia.

Croton Oil: as liniment to the loins in chronic cases is sometimes
useful.

Digitalis: the infusion is the most valuable in acute and tubal
nephritis, and in renal disease attended with dropsy due to cardiac
disease. Must be given with caution in granular kidney.

Elaterium: as hydragogue cathartic for dropsy; and when uremic symptoms
have come on.

Eucalyptus: cautiously for a short time in chronic disease.

Fuchsine: In 1 to 3 grn. doses in the day, in albuminuria of renal
origin, in children.

Gaduol: as a tonic.

Glycerinophosphates.

Gold Trichloride: In contracted kidney, in the chronic disease, in
doses of 1/20 grn.

Hemo-gallol: in anemia.

Hydrastis: lessens albumen.

Incisions: over the malleoli, to relieve the anasarca of the lower
extremities.

Iron: to diminish anemia with a flabby tongue, give the per-salts. In
dropsy associated with high tension, iron must be cautiously given, and
withheld unless improvement is quickly shown. It always does harm if
allowed to constipate.

Jaborandi: in uremia and dropsy due either to renal disease or
occurring in pregnancy.

Juniper Oil: diuretic.

Lead: lessens albumen and increases the urine.

Levico Water.

Lime Water.

Milk Cure: pure skim-milk diet very useful when tendency to uremia; it
also lessens the albumen.

Naphtol.

Nitroglycerin: in acute and chronic albuminuria.

Nitrous Ether: as diuretic.

Oxygen: compressed, will, on inhalation, temporarily diminish albumen.

Pilocarpine.

Potassium salts: especially the iodide and vegetable salts in
syphilitic or amyloid disease.

Potassium Bitartrate: as hydragogue cathartic and diuretic.

Potassium Bromide: in uremic convulsions.

Strontium Acetate.

Strontium Lactate: if due to renal atony.

Tannalbin.

Tartrates: as diuretics.

Turpentine: as diuretic, 1/2 to 1 minim dose every two to four hours.

Water: in large draughts as diuretic when excretion of solids is
deficient; and in dropsy.


~Alcoholism.~--_See also, Delirium Tremens, Vomiting, Neuritis._

Actæa Racemosa: in irritative dyspepsia.

Ammonia: aromatic spirit of, as substitute for alcohol, to be taken
when the craving comes on.

Ammonium Chloride.

Ammonium Acetate.

Arsenic: to lessen vomiting in drunkards, in the morning before food is
taken; and also in the irritable stomach of drunkards.

Bismuth: with hydrocyanic acid, to relieve acidity and heartburn.

Bromides: useful during delirium tremens, or to lessen irritability, in
1 dram doses in the wakeful condition which immediately precedes it.

Capsicum: as a substitute for alcohol, and also to relieve the
restlessness and insomnia.

Chloral Hydrate: to quiet nervous system and induce sleep in an acute
attack. Must be used with caution in old drunkards.

Cimicifuga.

Cocaine: to remove the craving.

Faradization.

Gelsemium: same as bromides.

Gold and Sodium Chloride.

Hydrastine.

Ichthalbin.

Levico Water: as tonic.

Lupulin: along with capsicum as substitute for alcohol, also to quiet
nervous system in delirium tremens.

Milk: at night.

Nux Vomica: as tonic and stimulant, both to nervous system and
generally to aid digestion.

Opium: May be necessary to produce sleep; to relieve the pain of the
chronic gastritis and the want of appetite.

Orange: slowly sucked, a substitute for alcohol.

Phosphorus: in chronic cases as nerve tonic.

Picrotoxine: for tremors.

Potassium Bromide.

Quinine: in the "horrors" stage it acts as a sedative to the brain and
restores the digestive functions.

Strychnine Nitrate.

Sumbul: in the headache of old drinkers.

Water, cold: a glass taken in small sips at a time as substitute for
alcohol.

Water, hot: one pint drunk as hot as possible an hour before meals will
remove craving.

Zinc Oxide: in chronic alcoholic dyspepsia, and nervous debility. It
also allays the craving.


~Alopecia.~--_See also, Tinea Decalvans._

Acid, Carbolic: in Alopecia areata.

Acid, Gallic.

Acid, Nitric: with olive oil in sufficient quantity just to make it
pugnant.

Alcohol.

Ammonia: very useful; take Ol. amygd. dul., Liq. ammoniæ, each 1 fl.
oz., Spt. rosmarini, Aquæ, Mellis, each 3 fl. drams; mix; make lotion
(E. Wilson).

Antimonium Tartaratum: as lotion, 1 grn. to 1 fl. oz. water.

Arsenic: internally.

Cantharides Tincture: one part to eight of castor oil rubbed in roots
of hair morning and night.

Eucalyptus.

Europhen.

Glycerin: very useful: either alone or in combination appears greatly
to assist.

Jaborandi.

Naphtol.

Nutgall.

Pilocarpine: subcutaneous injection has been useful.

Quillaja.

Resorcin.

Savine Oil: Prevents loss of hair in Alopecia pityroides.

Sapo Viridis: very useful as a shampoo night and morning--Take Saponis
virid. (German), Alcoholis, each 3 fl. oz. Ol. lavandulæ, 30 drops.

Shaving: sometimes useful after illness.

Sodium Bicarbonate: as a lotion in Alopecia pityroides.

Sulphur Iodide: useful both internally and externally.

Tannin: watery solution or made up into ointment.

Thymol.

Thyraden, and other Thyroid preparations.


~Amaurosis and Amblyopia.~

Amyl Nitrite: useful in many cases of disease of the optic nerve.

Antipyrine.

Arnica: sometimes useful.

Digitalis: in toxic cases.

Electricity.

Emmenagogues: if due to menstrual disorders.

Mercury: when due to syphilis.

Myotomy: in asthenopia and hysterical amblyopia.

Nitroglycerin.

Nux Vomica.

Phosphorus.

Pilocarpine: in tobacco and alcoholic abuse.

Potassium Bromide.

Potassium Iodide.

Rue: in minute doses in functional dimness of vision, _e.g._ hysterical
amblyopia.

Salicylates.

Santonin: sometimes useful in later stages of iritis and chloroiditis,
and in loss of power of optic nerve.

Seton: on temple; or blisters, along with iodide of potassium, in
amaurosis coming on suddenly, and associated with tenderness of the
eyeball on pressure; the disc is sometimes congested.

Silver Nitrate.

Strychnine: very useful in cases of tobacco amaurosis, alcoholic
excess, nerve atrophy (without cranial disease), and in traumatic
amaurosis.

Veratrine: to eyelids and temples. Care must be taken to keep out of
the eye.

Zinc Lactate.


~Amenorrhea.~--_See also Anemia, Chlorosis._

Acid, Oxalic.

Aconite: when menses are suddenly checked, as by cold, etc.

Actæa Racemosa: to restore the secretion, and remove the headache,
ovarian neuralgia, etc., produced by its sudden stoppage.

Alcohol: in sudden suppression after exposure.

Aloes: alone or with iron. In torpor and anemia; best administered a
few days before the expected period.

Ammonium Chloride: in headache.

Apiol: 5--10 min. twice a day for some days before the expected period;
if there is a molimen, 15 grn. in a few hours. Useful in anemia and
torpor only.

Arnica.

Arsenic: along with iron in anemia and functional inactivity of the
ovaries and uterus.

Asafetida: along with aloes in anemia and torpor of the intestines.

Baptisin.

Berberine Carbonate.

Cantharides: along with iron in torpor of the uterus.

Cimicifuga: at the proper time for a flow.

Cold Sponging: to brace the patient up.

Colocynth: in anemia with constipation.

Croton Oil.

Electricity: locally applied, sometimes useful.

Ergot: in plethoric subjects.

Eupatorium: in hot infusion, if due to cold.

Gold Salts: like asafoetida.

Guaiacum: mild stimulant to the uterus.

Ichthalbin.

Iron: in anemia, q.v.

Iron Iodide.

Iron Phosphate.

Levico Water.

Manganese Dioxide: in amenorrhea of young women; in delayed
menstruation, or when a period has been missed through a chill.
Perseverance is required, especially in the last case.

