The Project Gutenberg EBook of Medical Essays, by Oliver Wendell Holmes,
Sr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Medical Essays

Author: Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr.

Release Date: August 16, 2006 [EBook #2700]
Last Updated: February 18, 2018
Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



The character of the opposition which some of these papers have met with
suggests the inference that they contain really important, but unwelcome
truths. Negatives multiplied into each other change their sign and
become positives. Hostile criticisms meeting together are often
equivalent to praise, and the square of fault-finding turns out to be
the same thing as eulogy.

But a writer has rarely so many enemies as it pleases him to believe.
Self-love leads us to overrate the numbers of our negative constituency.
The larger portion of my limited circle of readers must be quite
indifferent to, if not ignorant of, the adverse opinions which have been
expressed or recorded concerning any of these Addresses or Essays now
submitted to their own judgment. It is proper, however, to inform
them, that some of the positions maintained in these pages have been
unsparingly attacked, with various degrees of ability, scholarship,
and good-breeding. The tone of criticism naturally changes with local
conditions in different parts of a country extended like our own, so
that it is one of the most convenient gauges of the partial movements in
the direction of civilization. It is satisfactory to add, that the views
assailed have also been unflinchingly defended by unsought champions,
among the ablest of whom it is pleasant to mention, at this moment of
political alienation, the Editor of the Charleston Medical Journal.

“Currents and Counter-Currents” was written and delivered as an Oration,
a florid rhetorical composition, expressly intended to secure the
attention of an audience not easy to hold as listeners. It succeeded
in doing this, and also in being as curiously misunderstood and
misrepresented as if it had been a political harangue. This gave it more
local notoriety than it might otherwise have attained, so that, as I
learn, one ingenious person made use of its title as an advertisement to
a production of his own.

The commonest mode of misrepresentation was this: qualified
propositions, the whole meaning of which depended on the qualifications,
were stripped of these and taken as absolute. Thus, the attempt to
establish a presumption against giving poisons to sick persons was
considered as equivalent to condemning the use of these substances.
The only important inference the writer has been able to draw from the
greater number of the refutations of his opinions which have been kindly
sent him, is that the preliminary education of the Medical Profession is
not always what it ought to be.

One concession he is willing to make, whatever sacrifice of pride it
may involve. The story of Massasoit, which has furnished a coral, as it
were, for some teething critics, when subjected to a powerful logical
analysis, though correct in its essentials, proves to have been told
with exceptionable breadth of statement, and therefore (to resume
the metaphor) has been slightly rounded off at its edges, so as to
be smoother for any who may wish to bite upon it hereafter. In
other respects the Discourse has hardly been touched. It is only an
individual's expression, in his own way, of opinions entertained by
hundreds of the Medical Profession in every civilized country, and has
nothing in it which on revision the writer sees cause to retract or
modify. The superstitions it attacks lie at the very foundation of
Homoeopathy, and of almost every form of medical charlatanism. Still
the mere routinists and unthinking artisans in most callings dislike
whatever shakes the dust out of their traditions, and it may be
unreasonable to expect that Medicine will always prove an exception to
the rule. One half the opposition which the numerical system of Louis
has met with, as applied to the results of treatment, has been owing
to the fact that it showed the movements of disease to be far more
independent of the kind of practice pursued than was agreeable to the
pride of those whose self-confidence it abated.

The statement, that medicines are more sparingly used in physicians'
families than in most others, admits of a very natural explanation,
without putting a harsh construction upon it, which it was not
intended to admit. Outside pressure is less felt in the physician's own
household; that is all. If this does not sometimes influence him to give
medicine, or what seems to be medicine, when among those who have more
confidence in drugging than his own family commonly has, the learned
Professor Dunglison is hereby requested to apologize for his definition
of the word Placebo, or to expunge it from his Medical Dictionary.

One thing is certain. A loud outcry on a slight touch reveals the weak
spot in a profession, as well as in a patient. It is a doubtful policy
to oppose the freest speech in those of our own number who are trying to
show us where they honestly believe our weakness lies. Vast as are
the advances of our Science and Art, may it not possibly prove on
examination that we retain other old barbarisms beside the use of the
astrological sign of Jupiter, with which we endeavor to insure good luck
to our prescriptions? Is it the act of a friend or a foe to try to point
them out to our brethren when asked to address them, and is the speaker
to subdue the constitutional habit of his style to a given standard,
under penalty of giving offence to a grave assembly?

“Homoeopathy and its Kindred Delusions” was published nearly twenty
years ago, and has been long out of print, so that the author tried in
vain to procure a copy until the kindness of a friend supplied him with
the only one he has had for years. A foolish story reached his ears that
he was attempting to buy up stray copies for the sake of suppressing it.
This edition was in the press at that very time.

Many of the arguments contained in the Lectures have lost whatever
novelty they may have possessed. All its predictions have been submitted
to the formidable test of time. They appear to have stood it, so far,
about as well as most uninspired prophecies; indeed, some of them
require much less accommodation than certain grave commentators employ
in their readings of the ancient Prophets.

If some statistics recently published are correct, Homoeopathy has made
very slow progress in Europe.

In all England, as it appears, there are hardly a fifth more
Homoeopathic practitioners than there are students attending Lectures at
the Massachusetts Medical College at the present time. In America it has
undoubtedly proved more popular and lucrative, yet how loose a hold it
has on the public confidence is shown by the fact that, when a specially
valued life, which has been played with by one of its agents, is
seriously threatened, the first thing we expect to hear is that a
regular practitioner is by the patient's bed, and the Homoeopathic
counsellor overruled or discarded. Again, how many of the ardent and
capricious persons who embraced Homoeopathy have run the whole round of
pretentious novelties;--have been boarded at water-cure establishments,
closeted with uterine and other specialists, and finally wandered over
seas to put themselves in charge of foreign celebrities, who dosed them
as lustily as they were ever dosed before they took to globules! It
will surprise many to learn to what a shadow of a shade Homoeopathy
has dwindled in the hands of many of its noted practitioners. The
itch-doctrine is treated with contempt. Infinitesimal doses are replaced
by full ones whenever the fancy-practitioner chooses. Good Homoeopathic
reasons can be found for employing anything that anybody wants to
employ. Homoeopathy is now merely a name, an unproved theory, and a box
of pellets pretending to be specifics, which, as all of us know, fail
ignominiously in those cases where we would thankfully sacrifice all our
prejudices and give the world to have them true to their promises.

