The Project Gutenberg eBook, Readings on Fascism and National Socialism,
by Various, Edited by Alan Swallow


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Readings on Fascism and National Socialism

Author: Various

Release Date: November 16, 2004  [eBook #14058]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



Like every concrete political conception, Fascism is thought and
action. It is action with an inherent doctrine which, arising out of a
given system of historic forces, is inserted in it and works on it
from within. It has therefore a form co-related to the contingencies
of time and place; but it has at the same time an ideal content which
elevates it into a formula of truth in the higher region of the
history of thought.

There is no way of exercising a spiritual influence on the things of
the world by means of a human will-power commanding the wills of
others, without first having a clear conception of the particular and
transient reality on which the will-power must act, and without also
having a clear conception of the universal and permanent reality in
which the particular and transient reality has its life and being. To
know men we must have a knowledge of man; and to have a knowledge of
man we must know the reality of things and their laws.

There can be no conception of a State which is not fundamentally a
conception of Life. It is a philosophy or intuition, a system of ideas
which evolves itself into a system of logical contraction, or which
concentrates itself in a vision or in a faith, but which is always,
at least virtually, an organic conception of the world.


2. Spiritualised Conception.

Fascism would therefore not be understood in many of its
manifestations (as, for example, in its organisations of the Party,
its system of education, its discipline) were it not considered in the
light of its general view of life. A spiritualised view.

To Fascism the world is not this material world which appears on the
surface, in which man is an individual separated from all other men,
standing by himself and subject to a natural law which instinctively
impels him to lead a life of momentary and egoistic pleasure. In
Fascism man is an individual who is the nation and the country. He is
this by a moral law which embraces and binds together individuals and
generations in an established tradition and mission, a moral law which
suppresses the instinct to lead a life confined to a brief cycle of
pleasure in order, instead, to replace it within the orbit of duty in
a superior conception of life, free from the limits of time and space
a life in which the individual by self-abnegation and by the sacrifice
of his particular interests, even by death, realises the entirely
spiritual existence in which his value as a man consists.


3. Positive Conception of Life as a Struggle.

It is therefore a spiritual conception, itself also a result of the
general reaction of the Century against the languid and materialistic
positivism of the Eighteenth Century. Anti-positivist, but positive:
neither sceptical nor agnostic, neither pessimistic nor passively
optimistic, as are in general the doctrines (all of them negative)
which place the centre of life outside of man, who by his free will
can and should create his own world for himself.

Fascism wants a man to be active and to be absorbed in action with all
his energies; it wants him to have a manly consciousness of the
difficulties that exist and to be ready to face them. It conceives
life as a struggle, thinking that it is the duty of man to conquer
that life which is really worthy of him: creating in the first place
within himself the (physical, moral, intellectual) instrument with
which to build it.

As for the individual, so for the nation, so for mankind. Hence the
high value of culture in all its forms (art, religion, science) and
the supreme importance of education. Hence also the essential value
of labour, with which man conquers nature and creates the human world
(economic, political, moral, intellectual).


4. Ethical Conception.

This positive conception of life is evidently an ethical conception.
And it comprises the whole reality as well as the human activity which
domineers it. No action is to be removed from the moral sense; nothing
is to be in the world that is divested of the importance which belongs
to it in respect of moral aims. Life, therefore, as the Fascist
conceives it, is serious, austere, religious; entirely balanced in a
world sustained by the moral and responsible forces of the spirit. The
Fascist disdains the "easy" life.


5. Religious Conception.

Fascism is a religious conception in which man is considered to be in
the powerful grip of a superior law, with an objective will which
transcends the particular individual and elevates him into a fully
conscious member of a spiritual society. Anyone who has stopped short
at the mere consideration of opportunism in the religious policy of
the Fascist Regime, has failed to understand that Fascism, besides
being a system of government, is also a system of thought.


6. Historical and Realist Conception.

Fascism is an historical conception in which man could not be what he
is without being a factor in the spiritual process to which he
contributes, either in the family sphere or in the social sphere, in
the nation or in history in general to which all nations contribute.
Hence is derived the great importance of tradition in the records,
language, customs and rules of human society. Man without a part in
history is nothing.

For this reason Fascism is opposed to all the abstractions of an
individualistic character based upon materialism typical of the
Eighteenth Century; and it is opposed to all the Jacobin innovations
and utopias. It does not believe in the possibility of "happiness" on
earth as conceived by the literature of the economists of the
Seventeenth Century; it therefore spurns all the teleological
conceptions of final causes through which, at a given period of
history, a final systematisation of the human race would take place.
Such theories only mean placing oneself outside real history and
life, which is a continual ebb and flow and process of realisations.

Politically speaking, Fascism aims at being a realistic doctrine; in
its practice it aspired to solve only the problems which present
themselves of their own accord in the process of history, and which of
themselves find or suggest their own solution. To have the effect of
action among men, it is necessary to enter into the process of reality
and to master the forces actually at work.


7. The Individual and Liberty.

Anti-individualistic, the Fascist conception is for the State; it is
for the individual only in so far as he coincides with the State,
universal consciousness and will of man in his historic existence. It
is opposed to the classic Liberalism which arose out of the need of
reaction against absolutism, and had accomplished its mission in
history when the State itself had become transformed in the popular
will and consciousness.

Liberalism denied the State in the interests of the particular
individual; Fascism reaffirms the State as the only true expression of
the individual.

And if liberty is to be the attribute of the real man, and not of the
scarecrow invented by the individualistic Liberalism, then Fascism is
for liberty. It is for the only kind of liberty that is serious--the
liberty of the State and of the individual in the State. Because, for
the Fascist, all is comprised in the State and nothing spiritual or
human exists--much less has any value--outside the State. In this
respect Fascism is a totalising concept, and the Fascist State--the
unification and synthesis of every value--interprets, develops and
potentiates the whole life of the people.


8. Conception of a Corporate State.

No individuals nor groups (political parties, associations, labour
unions, classes) outside the State. For this reason Fascism is opposed
to Socialism, which clings rigidly to class war in the historic
evolution and ignores the unity of the State which moulds the classes
into a single, moral and economic reality. In the same way Fascism is
opposed to the unions of the labouring classes. But within the orbit
of the State with ordinative functions, the real needs, which give
rise to the Socialist movement and to the forming of labour unions,
are emphatically recognised by Fascism and are given their full
expression in the Corporative System, which conciliates every interest
in the unity of the State.


9. Democracy.

Individuals form classes according to categories of interests. They
are associated according to differentiated economical activities which
have a common interest: but first and foremost they form the State.
The State is not merely either the numbers or the sum of individuals
forming the majority of a people. Fascism for this reason is opposed
to the democracy which identifies peoples with the greatest number of
individuals and reduces them to a majority level. But if people are
conceived, as they should be, qualitatively and not quantitatively,
then Fascism is democracy in its purest form. The qualitative
conception is the most coherent and truest form and is therefore the
most moral, because it sees a people realised in the consciousness and
will of the few or even of one only; an ideal which moves to its
realisation in the consciousness and will of all. By "all" is meant
all who derive their justification as a nation, ethnically speaking,
from their nature and history, and who follow the same line of
spiritual formation and development as one single will and
consciousness--not as a race nor as a geographically determined
region, but as a progeny that is rather the outcome of a history which
perpetuates itself; a multitude unified by an idea embodied in the
will to have power and to exist, conscious of itself and of its
personality.


10. Conception of the State.

This higher personality is truly the nation, inasmuch as it is the
State. The nation does not beget the State, according to the decrepit
nationalistic concept which was used as a basis for the publicists of
the national States in the Nineteenth Century. On the contrary, the
nation is created by the State, which gives the people, conscious of
their own moral unity, the will, and thereby an effective existence.
The right of a nation to its independence is derived not from a
literary and ideal consciousness of its own existence, much less from
a _de facto_ situation more or less inert and unconscious, but from an
active consciousness, from an active political will disposed to
demonstrate in its right; that is to say, a kind of State already in
its pride (_in fieri_). The State, in fact, as a universal ethical
will, is the creator of right.


11. Dynamic Reality.

The nation as a State is an ethical reality which exists and lives in
measure as it develops. A standstill is its death. Therefore the
State is not only the authority which governs and which gives the
forms of law and the worth of the spiritual life to the individual
wills, but it is also the power which gives effect to its will in
foreign matters, causing it to be recognised and respected by
demonstrating through facts the universality of all the manifestations
necessary for its development. Hence it is organization as well as
expansion, and it may be thereby considered, at least virtually, equal
to the very nature of the human will, which in its evolution
recognises no barriers, and which realises itself by proving its
infinity.


12. The Rôle of the State.

The Fascist State, the highest and the most powerful form of
personality is a force, but a spiritual one. It reassumes all the
forms of the moral and intellectual life of man. It cannot, therefore,
be limited to a simple function of order and of safeguarding, as was
contended by Liberalism. It is not a simple mechanism which limits the
sphere of the presumed individual liberties. It is an internal form
and rule, a discipline of the entire person: it penetrates the will as
well as the intelligence. Its principle, a central inspiration of the
living human personality in the civil community, descends into the
depths and settles in the heart of the man of action as well as the
thinker, of the artist as well as of the scientist; the soul of our
soul.


13. Discipline and Authority.

Fascism, in short, is not only a lawgiver and the founder of
institutions, but an educator and a promoter of the spiritual life. It
aims to rebuild not the forms of human life, but its content, the man,
the character, the faith. And for this end it exacts discipline and an
authority which descend into and dominates the interior of the spirit
without opposition. Its emblem, therefore, is the lictorian _fasces_,
symbol of unity, of force and of justice.


