The Project Gutenberg EBook of Smithsonian Institution - United States
National Museum - Bulletin 240, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Smithsonian Institution - United States National Museum - Bulletin 240
       Contributions From the Museum of History and Technology

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: September 17, 2012 [EBook #40782]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



While Frank worked on his engine, he realized that certain parts of the
old running gear would need to be altered or replaced. In view of the
heavier and more powerful engine, he felt the old wheels, probably
having compressed band hubs, were inadequate. He procured a set of new,
heavier wheels[20] with Warner-type, cast-iron reinforced hubs. The
angle iron frame, apparently sturdy enough to carry the added weight,
was retained, but it was decided to install a heavier rear axle.[21] The
front axle assembly was at first allowed to remain unchanged, as was the
steering apparatus. A short time later when the engine and friction
transmission were bolted in place on the running gear, Frank saw that
the rigidity of the framework had an undesirable effect. When the
vehicle passed over any unevenness in the shop floor, the framework was
distorted and caused the jackshaft bearings to bind tightly enough on
the shaft to prevent its being turned by hand. In order to provide the
3-point suspension necessary to eliminate this distortion, Frank
attached the forward parts of the framework to an extra wooden spring
bar, installing between this bar and the front axle a vertical fifth
wheel of the type ordinarily used in a horizontal position in any light
carriage.

Frank next calculated that with the faster running engine the speed of
the vehicle would be about 15 miles an hour, too much for the heavily
loaded wheels. As he intended to make use of the original transmission,
he decided to decrease the speed by increasing the size of the friction
drum. He accomplished this by sliding a heavy fiber tube over the
original drum, bringing its diameter to approximately 14 inches. The
original shipper fork carriage was improved by separating the original
bearings to a greater distance, and eliminating one of the two bearings
on one end. This permitted a smooth and free operation of the small
sliding carriage.

In August 1893, possibly as a result of indoor experiments, Frank
discovered that the chains running from the small 5-tooth[22] jackshaft
sprockets to the large, bronze, wheel sprockets were tight at some times
and loose at others. This caused considerable unnecessary noise. The
difficulty apparently was the result of the sprockets being cast and not
machined. The patternmaker had said he believed he could make the
pattern accurately enough so that no machining of the castings would be
necessary. Nice castings were produced, but "these sprockets were the
reason why an unusual construction was put on the crankshaft [meaning
jackshaft]," explained Frank Duryea during an interview at the National
Museum on November 9, 1956. Elaborating further, in reply to the queries
of E. A. Battison, of the Museum's division of engineering, Duryea told
of the problem and the solution when he explained that the sprockets had
places where the shrinkage was not even. The hot metal, contracting as
it cooled, did not seem to contract uniformly, creating slightly unequal
distances between teeth. This resulted in the chain hanging quite loose
in some places and in others the tightness prevented adjustment. He
contacted Will Russell, foreman of the Russell shop, where the
automobile was made, and Russell showed him a device, built by George
Warwick, who had made the Warwick bicycle. It was an internal-cut gear,
according to Duryea's description, with sprocket teeth on its periphery.
With sprockets outside and normal teeth inside, the wheels were about 6
inches in diameter, externally.

These little internal-gear sprockets were hung on double-shrouded
pinions secured to each end of the jackshaft. A solid disc or housing
fitted against both ends of the pinion to prevent the internal gear
from working off sideways. Duryea explained the function of these
unique little parts: "as soon as tension came on that ring gear that we
talked about, it not only tightened the chain hanging on this sprocket
on the upper side, but it tightened it on both sides. [The sprocket]
rocks right out: both sides of the chain are tight."

This feature is one rarely encountered elsewhere, and Duryea, later in
the interview said, "To tell you the truth, I think I was just a little
bit ashamed about the thing, because I had to pull it off. I didn't like
the looks of it after I got it on."

Two small tanks, each with a capacity of approximately two gallons, were
mounted over the engine in the positions they still occupy, the one on
the left for gasoline,[23] the other for water. The small fitting under
the gasoline tank has a thumbscrew shutoff and a glass-sight feed tube,
leading to the carburetor. The water tank, an inch longer than the
gasoline tank, communicates with the water jacket of the engine through
two pieces of half-inch pipe, entering the jacket from above and below.
The overflow tank, holding just over a gallon, is suspended between the
rear axle and the flywheel.

A number of mufflers were constructed for the engine.[24] The first
experimental one was built of wood, being a box 6 × 6 × 15 inches with a
hole for the exhaust pipe in one end and a series of small holes in the
opposite end. Inside, Frank arranged metal plates which were somewhat
shorter than the depth of the box. Every other one was attached to the
bottom of the box; the intermediate plates were fastened to the top.
This contrivance muffled the sound considerably, but, as might be
expected, soon began to smoke. There can be little doubt that it was
replaced before any of the outdoor trials began. Another type consisted
of a cylindrical metal shell, perhaps six inches in diameter and ten or
twelve inches long. Here a series of perforated baffle plates were
inserted, with alternating solid plates having parts of their external
edges cut away. Two bolts running the length of the muffler held on the
cast-iron heads in a manner quite similar to the Model-T Ford mufflers
of later years. Though partially satisfactory, Frank, in a November 6,
1957, interview, complained that it made a metallic sound. Perhaps this
was the muffler he used from September to November 1893.

[Illustration: FIGURE 21.--ILLUSTRATION OF THE NO. 2 SAMSON BATTERY used
by the Duryeas in their vehicle. (Smithsonian photo 46858.)]

On August 28 Frank wrote to Charles saying the carriage was almost ready
for the road and that he hoped to take it out for a test on the coming
Saturday, "off somewhere so no one will see us...."[25] There is no
evidence showing whether the amount of remaining work permitted the
proposed trial on September 2. The body was finally replaced on the
running gear, at which time it was found necessary to raise the seat
cushion several inches by the insertion of a framework made of old
crating boards. This allowed sufficient room between the seat and the
frame to suspend the batteries and coil. Six no. 2 Samson batteries were
contained in this space, three on each side, in rows parallel to the
side of the vehicle. The Samson battery consisted of a glass jar
containing a solution of ammonia salts and water, with a carbon rod in
the center, housing a zinc rod. It is difficult to understand why they
used Samson batteries rather than dry cells; perhaps they were concerned
with the mounting cost of the machine and were making use of parts
already on hand.[26] A coil, possibly from an old gaslight igniter
system, accompanied the Samson batteries under the seat. This original
coil is now missing.

The iron dash frame, previously recovered and provided with a rain apron
to be pulled up over the knees in the event a heavy rain blew in under
the carriage top, was bolted back in place. Frank and Mr. Markham gave
the carriage a quick painting; later Frank admitted, "the machine never
had a good job of painting."[27] Before the motor wagon actually got
onto the road, a reporter on the _Springfield Evening Union_ got some
statistics on it and an item appeared on September 16, giving the first
public notice of the machine.


[Illustration: NO USE FOR HORSES.

Springfield Mechanics Devise a New Mode of Travel.

Ingenious Wagon Now Being Made in This City for Which the Makers Claim
Great Things.

A new motor carriage, which, if the preliminary tests prove successful
as is expected, will revolutionize the mode of travel on highways, and
do away with the horse as a means of transportation, is being made in
this city. It is quite probable that within a short time one may be able
to see an ordinary carriage in almost every respect, running along the
streets or climbing country hills without visible means of propulsion.
The carriage is being built by J. F. Duryea, the designer and B. F.
Markham, who have been at work on it for over a year. The vehicle was
designed by C. E. Duryea, a bicycle manufacturer of Peoria, Ill., and he
communicated his scheme to his brother, who is a practical machanic in
this city.

The propelling power is furnished by a two-horse power gasoline motor
situated near the rear axle and which, when started, runs continuously
to the end of the trip, notwithstanding the number of times the carriage
may be stopped. The speed of the motor is uniform, being about 500
revolutions a minute, and is so arranged that it gives a multiplied
power for climbing hills and the lower the rate of speed the greater
power is furnished by the motor. The slowest that the carriage can be
driven is three miles an hour and the speed can be increased to fourteen
or fifteen miles an hour. The power is transferred from the driving
wheel of the motor, which runs horizontally with the main shaft by an
endless friction belt running on a drum wheel. The belt is controlled by
a lever within easy reach of the driver and is shifted along the drum
wheel to increase or decrease the speed. The driving wheel is about
twenty inches in diameter, having in its center a depression to which
the belt is shifted to stop the carriage.

The carriage can be reversed by shifting the belt from the end of the
drum, which gives the forward motion to the opposite side beyond the
depression in the driving wheel. The power which has been transferred to
the driving shaft from the motor is in turn transferred to the two rear
wheels of the carriage by a combination gear and sprockets. An endless
chain connects the sprockets on the carriage wheels to the sprocket
wheels on the driving shaft. All of the motive power is located under
the body of an ordinary phaeton, the hight of which is not increased by
the machinery. The motor is started by a crank which is easily applied
to a shaft in the rear of the carriage and the gasoline is ignited in
the cylinder by electricity. An automatic device stops the flow of
gasoline into the cylinder when the motor ceases running. The gasoline
is carried in tanks, which hold about two gallons, and which will run
the carriage for about eight hours. The wagon is guided by a bicycle
bar, and the speed is also controlled by this bar.

The method employed in this is as follows: To start the carriage press
the lever down; to reverse it throw the lever up and to guide the wagon
turn the lever either to the right or left. The front axle instead of
turning horizontally plays up and down, in order that the machinery may
be on a level with the rear wheels, while the front wheels are set on
the axle by a pivotal joint and are connected with the guiding lever by
bars with ball bearings. The carriage complete weighs about 220 pounds,
and the essential features are already covered by patents while others
are pending.

It is estimated that the carriages can be sold for about $400, and a
stock company will probably be formed to manufacture them.

FIGURE 22.--FROM THE _Springfield Evening Union_, September 16, 1893.]

Toward the latter part of the following week, Frank was ready to give
the product of his labors its first road trial. On September 21 the
completed carriage was rolled onto the elevator at Russell's shop.
Seeing that the running gear was too long for the elevator, they raised
the front of the machine, resting the entire weight of 750 pounds on the
rear wheels. Once outside the building, they pushed it into an area
between the Russell and Stacy buildings. After dark, "so no one will
see," Will Bemis, Mr. Markham's son-in-law, brought a horse and they
pulled the phaeton out to his barn on Spruce Street.[28] There, on
Spruce and Florence Streets the first tests were made. The next day
Frank wrote his brother saying, "Have tried it (the carriage) finally
and thoroughly and quit trying until some changes are made. Belt
transmission very bad.[29] Engine all right." He did admit the engine
seemed to be well loaded most of the time. He also had an idea in mind
to replace the poor transmission, explaining the plan to Charles: "The
three gears[30] on secondary shaft have friction clutches, the two bevel
gears on same shaft are controlled by a clutch which frees one and
clutches the other at will. This provides a reverse."


[Illustration: PRIMARY SPARK COILS.

 FOR ELECTRIC GAS LIGHTING.

 Cat. No. 48304.  8 inch                      Price, each, $3 20
    "     50304. 10   "                            "        3 70
    "     52304. 12   "                            "        4 30
    "     54304. Detached Gas Lighting Relays      "        2 75

 For Spark Coils with Relay Attachment, add $2.50 to price for Spark Coil.

FIGURE 23.--TYPE OF SPARK COIL the Duryeas are believed to have used in
their electrical circuit, as shown in a catalog illustration.
(Smithsonian photo 46858-A.)]

The _Springfield Evening Union_ of September 22 carried a notice of the
trial. This report, too, commented on the faulty transmission and the
plan already in Frank's mind for the new transmission.

     ... The friction belt allowed of the speed being steadily increased
     or diminished at the will of the driver and caused no sudden
     forward motion of the carriage, but while this arrangement has many
     advantages it uses up the power so that the two-horse power
     furnished by the motor [somewhat less than the rating Frank gave
     the engine] was reduced to less than three-fourths horse power on
     reaching the main shaft. This would not be sufficient to propel the
     carriage up steep grades but would be sufficient to run the
     carriage on level road.

     The inventors will do away with this belt in favor of a clamp gear
     and will make the drum wheel smaller. By this means there will be
     very little power lost in transmission to the shaft and by a
     patented arrangement the carriage may be started gradually but the
     speed must be increased by shifting the clamp gear to a succession
     of gears on the driving wheel of the motor. The speed of the
     carriage will be fixed permanently according to the size of the
     gear that the smaller one is shifted to. The test of the machine
     with the gear arrangement will be made soon.

In October Frank decided on another vacation and went to Chicago to see
the Columbian Exposition. Charles had come up from Peoria to see the
fair and the two talked over the progress on their motor wagon, and
discussed the transmission problem. They gave particular attention to
everything relating to engines and motor carriages, and Frank recalls
seeing a Daimler quadricycle that impressed him with its performance.[31]
Just what decisions the two might have made there are unknown, yet it is
likely that they agreed to give the old transmission one more chance to
prove itself.

Returning to Springfield, probably in the first week of November, Frank
gave the friction drive its final test, this time substituting a leather
belt for the rubber one first used.[32] Mr. Markham, though intensely
interested in the experiments, apparently was dubious concerning the
safety of the carriage. It had no brakes, and fearing failure of the
transmission on a downgrade, he was reluctant to ride in the machine. On
November 9 he asked Will Bemis to try it for him. The following day the
_Springfield Morning Union_ gave a description of the run:

     Residents in the vicinity of Florence street flocked to the windows
     yesterday afternoon astonished to see gliding by in the roadway a
     common top carriage with no shafts and no horse attached. The
     vehicle is operated by gasoline and is the invention of Erwin
     Markham and J. F. Duryea. It has been previously described in The
     Union and the trial yesterday was simply to ascertain the practical
     value of a leather friction surface which has been substituted for
     the rubber one previously used. The vehicle, which was operated by
     Mr. Bemis, started from the corner of Hancock avenue and Spruce
     street and went up the avenue, up Hancock street and started down
     Florence street, working finely, but when about half-way down the
     latter street it stopped short, refusing to move. Investigation
     showed that the bearing had been worn smooth by the friction and a
     little water sprinkled upon it put it in running condition again.
     The rest of the trip was made down Florence and down Spruce street,
     to the residence of the inventors. They hope to have the vehicle in
     good working condition soon.

[Illustration: FIGURE 24.--RUNNING GEAR OF DURYEA VEHICLE, showing the
second engine and other parts as used in January 1894.]

The same evening, the late edition ran a brief paragraph stating that
"the test was made to determine the value of a leather friction surface
for propelling the wagon, that had been substituted in place of the
rubber surface, used in the former test." Bemis, according to Frank
Duryea's recollection, was not impressed with the performance of the
machine, saying "the thing is absolutely useless," and for a time it
appeared that further support from Markham would not be forthcoming.
Frank, believing eventual success to be near, drew up plans showing his
geared transmission, and with these managed to gain Markham's partial
support. Money for material and use of the shop was to continue, but
Frank was to complete the work on his own time.

Now receiving no salary, Frank worked hurriedly on the transmission
throughout late November, December, and the first two weeks of January.
First discarding the old friction drum and shaft, and the shipper-fork
carriage, he bolted a rawhide bevel gear to the lower surface of the
flywheel. This turns two bevel gears, in opposite directions, on a
countershaft directly underneath, approximately in the position of the
old jackshaft. The right bevel gear is secured to the main countershaft
on which two clutches are mounted, one on each side of the crankshaft.
On a sleeve turning freely around the countershaft is mounted the
reverse bevel gear and clutch. Three free-running clutch drums, the
right one carrying the high-speed gear, the two on the left carrying the
combination low speed and reverse gear between them, complete the
countershaft assembly. The clutch assemblies are of Frank Duryea's
design, having internal arms, expanding outward to press leather-faced
shoes against the inner surface of the drum, thus securing the drum and
its gear to the shaft. Behind this machinery is the jackshaft with its
small differential on the right, two laminated rawhide gears[33] meshing
with the iron gears of the countershaft, and the internal-gear sprockets
hanging on the small pinions at either end. A sliding cam bar, mounted
nearly in the position of the former shipper-fork carriage, is operated
by the vertical movement of the tiller handle to engage any one of the
three clutches. With the tiller depressed, the vehicle is in reverse.
Elevating it slightly puts it into low gear, and raising it still higher
runs the machine at its highest speed.

[Illustration: FIGURE 25.--HALF OF JACKSHAFT, showing rawhide gears,
double shrouded pinion and half of the Columbia differential.]

[Illustration: FIGURE 26.--HALF OF JACKSHAFT showing double-shrouded
pinion and half of the Columbia differential.

[Illustration: FIGURE 27.--CAM BAR IN FOREGROUND, operated by tiller,
actuates the various clutches of the transmission. The overflow gasoline
tank with the hand pump can be seen in the rear.]


