The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Journal of the American-Irish
Historical Society (Vol. VI), by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society (Vol. VI)

Author: Various

Editor: Thomas Hamilton Murray

Release Date: October 2, 2020 [EBook #63039]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


The annual meeting and dinner of the Society took place at the Hotel
Manhattan, 42d Street and Madison Avenue, New York City, on Thursday
evening, January 18, 1906. Preceding the meeting a reception was held,
during which the members and guests from various cities and states
exchanged greetings and congratulated each other upon the continued
success of the organization.

The annual meeting was called to order by Hon. John D. Crimmins of New
York City, president-general of the Society.

Thomas Hamilton Murray of Boston, Mass., secretary-general of the
organization, recorded the minutes of the meeting.

Mr. Crimmins delivered an address of welcome and felicitated the Society
upon its usefulness and good work in the cause of historical truth.

It was voted that, in order to save time, the reading of the records of
the preceding meeting be omitted.

The annual reports of the secretary-general and the treasurer-general
were then presented, and were accepted and adopted.

Appropriate action was taken on members of the Society who had died
during the year.

Mr. Edward J. McGuire of New York City, paid an eloquent tribute to the
late Francis C. Travers of the Society. Mr. Travers was one of the
leading New York members of the organization and always took an active
interest in advancing its interests and welfare.

The list of officers nominated by the executive council to serve the
Society for the ensuing year, was presented and was unanimously elected,
the secretary-general being authorized to cast one ballot for the same.
(The ticket is set forth on pages 5 and 6 of this volume.)

Upon the result of the election being announced, Hon. Franklin M.
Danaher of Albany, N. Y., the newly-chosen vice-president-general, took
the chair, in the absence of Admiral McGowan, the new president-general.

Judge Danaher thanked the members for the honor bestowed upon him, and
delivered a brief address along the Society’s line of work.

During the meeting attention was called to the movement to erect a
monument in Washington, D. C., to Commodore John Barry, and the active
interest of the members of the Society was urged in behalf of the
project.

After thanks had been extended the retiring officers for their services
to the Society, several new members were elected and the meeting
adjourned.


                           THE ANNUAL DINNER.

Upon the adjournment of the business meeting, the members and guests
proceeded to the banquet hall of the Manhattan for the annual dinner.
Judge Danaher presided and seated on his right and left, among others,
were: the retiring president-general, Hon. John D. Crimmins; Hon. Joseph
T. Lawless of Norfolk, Va.; Michael F. Dooley, of the Union Trust
Company, Providence, R. I.; Hon. John Hannan, mayor of Ogdensburg, N.
Y.; Hon. John F. Finerty, Chicago, Ill., and other prominent gentlemen.

After grace had been said, the company began a practical discussion of
the elaborate menu prepared for the occasion. Among those present were
the following:


          ADDRESS TO THE SOCIETY BY PRESIDENT-GENERAL McGOWAN.


The following address was issued early in the year by President-General
McGowan:

  _To the Members of the American-Irish Historical Society_:

  GENTLEMEN: Permit me to express my gratitude for the honor you have
  done me in electing me to be your president-general for the ensuing
  year. I accept the office, and will discharge its duties and
  responsibilities to the utmost of my ability.

  To be the official head of a society such as ours is a position any
  man, no matter how exalted his place in life, should be proud to
  hold. My distinguished predecessors in the office—Meade, Moseley,
  Gargan, Crimmins, McAdoo—have ably presided over the Society’s
  affairs in the past and have reflected honor upon the organization,
  as honor has been reflected upon them in virtue of their being
  chosen to that high station.

  The American-Irish Historical Society is now in its tenth year of
  existence. It has accomplished a vast amount of good, and the
  practical work it has so abundantly performed is of permanent value
  and utility. No organization was more needed and none has a broader
  or more glorious field in which to work.

  The Irish chapter in American history is one of the most important
  and interesting in our career as a nation. It was a strong and
  important chapter in America for even a century before we became a
  nation, and has gone on increasing in importance and potency, in
  value and interest, as generation has succeeded generation, until
  today it stands unsurpassed in the respects mentioned.

  As John Boyle O’Reilly once wrote,

             We slight no true devotion, steal no fame
             From other shrines to gild the Pilgrims’ name.

  So I may say, we rob no race to gild the Irish name when we
  undertake to unearth the records of the past, showing what the Irish
  element has accomplished in the early colonial periods and in later
  periods when the republic was forming and had become a fact. We
  merely wish to claim, assert and set forth the credit which to us
  belongs, for the part that men and women of Irish blood took in
  bringing about the reign of liberty and freedom we now enjoy.

  Toward people of all other race elements in the make-up of the
  American people—English, French, Dutch, German, etc., by whatever
  name they may be known or from whatever land they or their ancestors
  may have come—we entertain good will and desire them to have such
  meed of credit and of praise as to them belongs. We do not wish to
  praise ourselves by “masquerading in borrowed plumes,” nor have we
  any desire to detract one iota from the credit that is honestly that
  of others.

  But the credit that is ours we demand and shall insist upon
  possessing. Our mission is “To make better known the Irish chapter
  in American history.” That brief statement of our principles conveys
  in a very few words our exact reason for existence as a society.

  We are an American historical organization devoted to a work that
  shall place the Irish element in this great republic in its proper
  and merited position before the American people of which we
  constitute no small part, and which shall, at the same time, reflect
  glory upon the Irish fatherland. Our Society rests upon a generous
  basis. Its founders builded wisely and for the perpetuation of the
  heroic deeds of the past. I trust these founders will long be
  honored by every member of the organization.

  Reviewing the work thus far accomplished by the Society, I am
  prompted to say a few words: With very limited financial means, we
  have, nevertheless, produced five handsome volumes of the JOURNAL of
  the organization, two other volumes of great merit and a number of
  extremely interesting pamphlets. Copies of these publications have
  been placed in the leading libraries of the country, where they have
  been cordially welcomed. Our publications are in the libraries of
  such institutions as Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Dartmouth, Cornell,
  Georgetown, Princeton, and other great universities, where they are
  having an excellent influence.

  Here in Washington our publications are in the library of Congress,
  in that of the George Washington University, in the Catholic
  University and in the newly-established Trinity College for young
  women. The United States Military Academy at West Point also has our
  works on its shelves, as has the Naval Academy at Annapolis. From
  many leading historical societies come reports of our publications
  being received by them.

  Many of the great public libraries—North, South, East and West are
  in receipt of the works issued by our Society, and the same are in
  constant demand for consultation and reference. Among these public
  libraries are those of New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Boston,
  Chicago, Troy, Rochester, Oswego, Buffalo, Detroit, Milwaukee,
  Minneapolis, Denver, San Francisco and other cities.

  This is practical work. I know of no other society that in so short
  a time has done so much of real, lasting value as has ours. Indeed,
  when we consider all the circumstances, we have done astonishingly
  well. Many societies hoary with age, in the possession of plethoric
  treasuries, and constantly receiving large bequests, have done no
  better, if as well, from a practical viewpoint.

  Our Society is fortunate in having an indefatigable secretary, who
  from the start has worked in season and out of season to advance the
  interests of the organization. A competent secretary is a priceless
  possession for any society, and we have been especially fortunate in
  this respect.

  The Hon. John D. Crimmins of New York City, my immediate predecessor
  in the office of president-general, has always been ready with
  purse, services and hospitality to forward the interests of the
  Society, and under his administration the organization has made
  splendid progress. Owing to his initiative, a movement has just been
  started to raise a permanent fund of $10,000 for the organization.
  This is good news, indeed, and I have no doubt the amount will be
  speedily raised. With a substantial fund such as this back of it,
  the Society will be enabled to be of even greater service in the
  future than it has in the past.

  The salient work of the organization must be its publications. The
  more we have of these the better for the cause we have at heart.
  While a dinner, now and then, is desirable, the organization must
  never deteriorate into a mere dining club. Too many societies,
  started with the most comprehensive program, have done this and lost
  sight of their original purposes. Our Society differs from others in
  that it is established for historical purposes, to make original
  research into the records and documents of the past and to place the
  result of its researches in permanent, tangible form. Careful and
  frequent publications will enable us to do this.

  A great deal depends upon the continued issuance of the annual
  volume of the JOURNAL of our Society. That work has thus far been,
  and will continue to be, of the greatest possible utility. It gives
  the Society a recognized standing in the community that would be
  difficult to obtain by any other means. Its advent, year by year,
  therefore, is of prime importance.

  Speaking incidentally, I may say that I would like to see special
  attention given during the year to a study of the material bearing
  upon the reputed voyages to these shores of the Irish missionary,
  Brendan. These voyages, attributed to a period many centuries
  preceding Christopher Columbus, appear to be fully as well
  authenticated as those of the Northmen to Vinland. Indeed, the Norse
  sagas mention remote Irish comers to these shores and duly credit a
  land here once known as Great Ireland. De Roo, in his recent work,
  the _History of America Before Columbus_, goes into this subject in
  a very entertaining manner. As a rule, our school text-books on
  history, while accepting implicitly the narratives relative to the
  Northmen and Vinland, find no room in their pages to even allude to
  Brendan and his voyages, although, as I have intimated, the latter
  seem to rest upon as secure an historical basis as the former. Mr.
  Justin Winsor and other distinguished writers, however, make special
  mention of the subject and treat the latter with respect.

  The history of the early Irish in Virginia is also deserving of our
  special attention. Irish names are found in the Old Dominion prior
  to the arrival of the Pilgrims at Plymouth Rock, while in the
  Plymouth colony itself, Governor Bradford tells us, numbers of Irish
  arrived a few years after the coming of the _Mayflower_. The war
  against the Indian king, Philip, 1675–’76, found Irish enlisted on
  the side of the colonists, showing that at that period sons of old
  Hibernia were numerous and active here. These and other early
  periods and movements furnish our Society ample material for
  consideration.

  As American history progresses, the material increases in volume and
  is greatly multiplied as the Revolution eventuates. But these facts
  are well known to you and require no lengthy narrative of detail on
  my part. I merely briefly refer to them in order, by way of review,
  to indicate the abundance of material awaiting development at our
  hands.

  I am delighted with the project now under way by the Society to
  erect a bronze tablet in the Rhode Island state capitol to the
  memory of Maj.-Gen. John Sullivan. The idea is a most felicitous one
  and deserves the heartiest commendation. Sullivan was one of the
  great soldiers of the Revolution. The placing of the forthcoming
  tablet will be a merited tribute to his patriotism and military
  skill while in command of the Rhode Island department and during the
  entire period of the war.

  There are many other great Americans of Irish blood who deserve like
  honors, and doubtless the Society will, from time to time, erect
  tablets to their memory or commemorate them in some other worthy
  manner. The suggestion that the occasion of the dedication of the
  Sullivan tablet be made a field day by the Society is a happy one,
  and will, I trust, be fully carried out.

  As our Society grows in numbers and prosperity, the question of
  permanent headquarters will demand consideration. Books and
  pamphlets will accumulate by gift or purchase and a place will be
  needed where these can be displayed for consultation by the members
  and others engaged in historical research. Where these headquarters
  shall be located is a subject for future action. A number of cities
  are deserving of consideration. In many respects, Washington, the
  national capital, would be the ideal place, while, New York, Boston,
  Philadelphia and other cities, also present special advantages. But
  this whole matter can be fully considered at some future time.

  The Society recalls with pleasure its visit to Washington a few
  years ago, when it was cordially received at the White House by our
  distinguished fellow-member, President Roosevelt. I hope that during
  my term as head of the organization the Society will again have
  occasion to visit the national capital and once more partake of
  Washington hospitality.

  Again expressing my gratitude for the honor you have conferred upon
  me and hoping that I shall have, while president-general, the
  generous assistance of every member of the Society, I remain

                                            Yours fraternally,
                                                JOHN MCGOWAN,
                                                  _President-General_.

  WASHINGTON, D. C., February 25, 1906.




                  RECEPTION TO THE PRESIDENT-GENERAL.


A brilliant event under the patronage of the Society took place in New
York City on April 26, 1906. The occasion was a reception to Admiral
John McGowan, U. S. N., the newly-elected president-general. The
exercises took place in the residence of the Hon. John D. Crimmins, and
will long be remembered by the large assemblage participating. Admiral
McGowan resides in Washington, D. C., and the reception was held in
order to give him and the members of the Society an opportunity to
exchange mutual greetings.

The reception was participated in by judges, prominent clergymen,
distinguished members of the medical, law, journalistic and other
professions, as well as by leading bankers and gentlemen prominent in
mercantile life.

Admiral McGowan received in the magnificent drawing-room of Mr.
Crimmins’ home, the introductions being made by Mr. Crimmins, who was
assisted by Thomas Hamilton Murray of Boston, the national secretary of
the Society.

The following is a copy of the notice sent to each member:


                   AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

  RECEPTION TO REAR-ADMIRAL JOHN MCGOWAN, U. S. N., PRESIDENT-GENERAL.

  _Dear Sir_: It gives me great pleasure to notify you that a
  reception to Rear-Admiral John McGowan, U. S. N., President-General
  of our Society, will take place in New York City on Thursday
  evening, April 26, 1906, at 8 o’clock.

  Owing to the kindness of our fellow member, the Hon. John D.
  Crimmins, the reception will be held at the home of the latter, 40
  East 68th Street, and it is hoped that every member of the Society
  who possibly can will be present on this occasion.

  Few events under the auspices of the organization will possess as
  much interest as this, and all who participate in the forthcoming
  reception to our President-General will find it a red-letter event
  in the history of the Society. Each member is at liberty to invite a
  friend to accompany him to the exercises.

  Kindly inform the Secretary, upon receipt of this notice, whether
  you will attend the reception, as it is desirable to know,
  approximately, how many will be present.

 