The Project Gutenberg EBook of Handbook of Medical Entomology, by 
William Albert Riley and Oskar Augustus Johanssen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Handbook of Medical Entomology

Author: William Albert Riley
        Oskar Augustus Johanssen

Release Date: November 11, 2010 [EBook #34279]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


In this connection, mention must be made of the scholarly article by the
American physician, A. F. A. King who, in 1883, brought together an all
but conclusive mass of argument in support of his belief that malaria
was caused by mosquitoes. At about the same time, Finley, of Havana, was
forcefully presenting his view that the mosquito played the chief rôle
in the spread of yellow fever.

To enter more fully into the general historical discussion is beyond the
scope of this book. We shall have occasion to make more explicit
references in considering various insect-borne diseases. Enough has been
said here to emphasize that the recognition of insects as factors in the
spread of disease was long presaged, and that there were not wanting
keen thinkers who, with a background of present-day conceptions of the
nature of disease, might have been in the front rank of investigators
along these lines.


THE WAYS IN WHICH ARTHROPODS MAY AFFECT THE HEALTH OF MAN

When we consider the ways in which insects and their allies may affect
the health of man, we find that we may treat them under three main
groups:

A. They may be directly poisonous. Such, for example, are the scorpions,
certain spiders and mites, some of the predaceous bugs, and stinging
insects. Even such forms as the mosquito deserve some consideration from
this viewpoint.

B. They may be parasitic, living more or less permanently on or in the
body and deriving their sustenance from it.

Of the parasitic arthropods we may distinguish, first, the _true
parasites_, those which have adopted and become confirmed in the
parasitic habit. Such are the itch mites, the lice, fleas, and the
majority of the forms to be considered as parasitic.

In addition to these, we may distinguish a group of _accidental_, or
_facultative parasites_, species which are normally free-living, feeding
on decaying substances, but which when accidentally introduced into the
alimentary canal or other cavities of man, may exist there for a greater
or less period. For example, certain fly larvæ, or maggots, normally
feeding in putrifying meat, have been known to occur as accidental or
facultative parasites in the stomach of man.

C. Finally, and most important, arthropods may be transmitters and
disseminators of disease. In this capacity they may function in one of
three ways; as _simple carriers_, as _direct inoculators_, or as
_essential hosts_ of disease germs.

As simple carriers, they may, in a wholly incidental manner, transport
from the diseased to the healthy, or from filth to food, pathogenic
germs which cling to their bodies or appendages. Such, for instance, is
the relation of the house-fly to the dissemination of typhoid.

As direct inoculators, biting or piercing species may take up from a
diseased man or animal, germs which, clinging to the mouth parts, are
inoculated directly into the blood of the insect's next victim. It it
thus that horse-flies may occasionally transmit anthrax. Similarly,
species of spiders and other forms which are ordinarily perfectly
harmless, may accidentally convey and inoculate pyogenic bacteria.

It is as essential hosts of disease germs that arthropods play their
most important rôle. In such cases an essential part of the life cycle
of the pathogenic organism is undergone in the insect. In other words,
without the arthropod host the disease-producing organism cannot
complete its development. As illustrations may be cited the relation of
the Anopheles mosquito to the malarial parasite, and the relation of the
cattle tick to Texas fever.

A little consideration will show that this is the most important of the
group. Typhoid fever is carried by water or by contaminated milk, and in
various other ways, as well as by the house-fly. Kill all the
house-flies and typhoid would still exist. On the other hand, malaria is
carried only by the mosquito, because an essential part of the
development of the malarial parasite is undergone in this insect.
Exterminate all of the mosquitoes of certain species and the
dissemination of human malaria is absolutely prevented.

Once an arthropod becomes an essential host for a given parasite it may
disseminate infection in three different ways:

1. By infecting man or animals who ingest it. It is thus, for example,
that man, dog, or cat, becomes infected with the double-pored dog
tapeworm, _Dipylidium caninum_. The cysticercoid stage occurs in the
dog louse, or in the dog or cat fleas, and by accidentally ingesting the
infested insect the vertebrate becomes infested. Similarly, _Hymenolepis
diminuta_, a common tapeworm of rats and mice, and occasional in man,
undergoes part of its life cycle in various meal-infesting insects, and
is accidentally taken up by its definitive host. It is very probable
that man becomes infested with _Dracunculus (Filaria) medinensis_
through swallowing in drinking water, the crustacean, _Cyclops_,
containing the larvæ of this worm.

2. By infecting man or animals on whose skin or mucous membranes the
insect host may be crushed or may deposit its excrement. The pathogenic
organism may then actively penetrate, or may be inoculated by
scratching. The causative organism of typhus fever is thus transmitted
by the body louse.

3. By direct inoculation by its bite, the insect host may transfer the
parasite which has undergone development within it. The malarial
parasite is thus transferred by mosquitoes; the Texas fever parasite by
cattle ticks.




CHAPTER II.

ARTHROPODS WHICH ARE DIRECTLY POISONOUS


Of all the myriads of insects and related forms, a very few are of
direct use to man, some few others have forced his approbation on
account of their wonderful beauty, but the great hordes of them are
loathed or regarded as directly dangerous. As a matter of fact, only a
very small number are in the slightest degree poisonous to man or to the
higher animals. The result is that entomologists and lovers of nature,
intent upon dissipating the foolish dread of insects, are sometimes
inclined to go to the extreme of discrediting all statements of serious
injury from the bites or stings of any species.

Nevertheless, it must not be overlooked that poisonous forms do exist,
and they must receive attention in a consideration of the ways in which
arthropods may affect the health of man. Moreover, it must be recognized
that "what is one man's meat, is another man's poison," and that in
considering the possibilities of injury we must not ignore individual
idiosyncrasies. Just as certain individuals may be poisoned by what, for
others, are common articles of food, so some persons may be abnormally
susceptible to insect poison. Thus, the poison of a bee sting may be of
varying severity, but there are individuals who are made seriously sick
by a single sting, regardless of the point of entry. Some individuals
scarcely notice a mosquito bite, others find it very painful, and so
illustrations of this difference in individuals might be multiplied.

In considering the poisonous arthropods, we shall take them up by
groups. The reader who is unacquainted with the systematic relationship
of insects and their allies is referred to Chapter XII. No attempt will
be made to make the lists under the various headings exhaustive, but
typical forms will be discussed.


ARANEIDA OR SPIDERS

Of all the arthropods there are none which are more universally feared
than are the spiders. It is commonly supposed that the majority, if not
all the species are poisonous and that they are aggressive enemies of
man and the higher animals, as well as of lower forms.

That they really secrete a poison may be readily inferred from the
effect of their bite upon insects and other small forms. Moreover, the
presence of definite and well-developed poison glands can easily be
shown. They occur as a pair of pouches (fig. 1) lying within the
cephalothorax and connected by a delicate duct with a pore on the claw
of the chelicera, or so-called "mandible" on the convex surface of the
claw in such a position that it is not plugged and closed by the flesh
of the victim.

[Illustration: 1. Head of a spider showing poison gland (_c_) and its
relation to the chelicera (_a_).]

The glands may be demonstrated by slowly and carefully twisting off a
chelicera and pushing aside the stumps of muscles at its base. By
exercising care, the chitinous wall of the chelicera and its claw may be
broken away and the duct traced from the gland to its outlet. The inner
lining of the sac is constituted by a highly developed glandular
epithelium, supported by a basement membrane of connective tissue and
covered by a muscular layer, (fig. 2). The muscles, which are striated,
are spirally arranged (fig. 1), and are doubtless under control of the
spider, so that the amount of poison to be injected into a wound may be
varied.

[Illustration: 2. Section through a venom gland of Latrodectus
13-guttatus showing the peritoneal, muscular and epithelial layers.
After Bordas.]

The poison itself, according to Kobert (1901), is a clear, colorless
fluid, of oily consistency, acid reaction, and very bitter taste. After
the spider has bitten two or three times, its supply is exhausted and
therefore, as in the case of snakes, the poison of the bite decreases
quickly with use, until it is null. To what extent the content of the
poison sacs may contain blood serum or, at least, active principles of
serum, in addition to a specific poison formed by the poison glands
themselves, Kobert regards as an open question. He believes that the
acid part of the poison, if really present, is formed by the glands and
that, in the case of some spiders, the ferment-like, or better, active
toxine, comes from the blood.

[Illustration: 3. Chelicera of a spider.]

But there is a wide difference between a poison which may kill an insect
and one which is harmful to men. Certain it is that there is no lack of
popular belief and newspaper records of fatal cases, but the evidence
regarding the possibility of fatal or even very serious results for man
is most contradictory. For some years, we have attempted to trace the
more circumstantial newspaper accounts, which have come to our notice,
of injury by North American species. The results have served, mainly, to
emphasize the straits to which reporters are sometimes driven when there
is a dearth of news. The accounts are usually vague and lacking in any
definite clue for locating the supposed victim. In the comparatively few
cases where the patient, or his physician, could be located, there was
either no claim that the injury was due to spider venom, or there was no
evidence to support the belief. Rarely, there was evidence that a
secondary blood poisoning, such as might be brought about by the prick
of a pin, or by any mechanical injury, had followed the bite of a
spider. Such instances have no bearing on the question of the venomous
nature of these forms.

