The Project Gutenberg EBook of Medical Jurisprudence, Forensic medicine
and Toxicology  - vol 1 of 4, by Rudolph August Witthaus and Tracy Chatfield Becker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Medical Jurisprudence, Forensic medicine and Toxicology  - vol 1 of 4

Author: Rudolph August Witthaus
        Tracy Chatfield Becker

Release Date: May 23, 2015 [EBook #49027]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



Medical legislation was not more advanced during the ascendancy of
the Roman Empire, although medical science was greatly developed,
principally by the labors of Celsus, and of Galen and other Greek
physicians. A few cases are mentioned by the historians which would
seem to indicate a closer connection between law and medicine than
had existed among the Greeks, but they refer rather to the custom of
exposing the bodies of those who had died by violent means to public
view, in order that any one might express his opinion as to the cause
of death, than to any appeal to medical science in the administration
of justice. Thus Suetonius[19] says that the physician Antistius
examined the dead body of Julius Cæsar (B.C. 44), and declared that of
all the wounds only that received in the breast was mortal.

Pliny[20] cites an early instance of contested interpretation of
post-mortem appearances in the case of Germanicus, who died A.D.
19, by the action of poison, said the enemies of Piso, because the
heart did not burn. The friends of Piso, while admitting the fact
of non-consumption, attributed it to the deceased having had heart
disease. The same author[21] quotes Masurius as having declared a child
born after thirteen (lunar) months to be legitimate, in an action for
the possession of property, on the ground that no certain period of
gestation was fixed. The Emperor Hadrian (A.D. 117-138), according to
Gellius, sought medical information in a similar case, and decreed the
legitimacy of a child born in the eleventh (lunar) month, “after having
considered the opinions of ancient philosophers and physicians.”[22]

Although the Justinian collections, the “Codex” (A.D. 529), the
“Institutes” (A.D. 533), the “Digests,” or “Pandects” (A.D. 534),
and the “Novels” (A.D. 535-564), prepared by the best legal talent
of the age, under the direction of Tribonian, do not provide for the
summoning of physicians as witnesses; they contain an expression which
indicates that at that time the true function of the medical expert
was more correctly appreciated than it is to-day. His function was
stated to be judicial rather than that of a witness.[23] There is
also a provision that in cases of contested pregnancy, midwives (who
were considered as belonging to the medical profession) should, after
examination of the woman, determine whether or no pregnancy exist, and
that their determination should be final. The practice of medicine,
surgery, and midwifery was regulated. Those desiring to practise must
have been found competent by an examination. The number of physicians
in each town was limited. They were divided into classes, and were
subject to the government of the Archiatri. Penalties were imposed upon
those guilty of malpractice or of poisoning. The Justinian enactments
contain abundant internal evidence of having been framed in the light
of medical knowledge. They contain provisions relating to sterility
and impotence, rape, disputed pregnancy, legitimacy, diseased mental
conditions, presumption of survivorship, poisoning, etc., which
indicate that the medical knowledge of the time was fully utilized in
their construction.[24]

The Germanic peoples at about the same period possessed codes in
which traces of a rudimentary medical jurisprudence existed. The most
ancient of these was the Salic law (A.D. 422), in which the penalties
to be paid for wounds of different kinds are fixed. The Ripuarian law,
of somewhat later date, takes cognizance of the crime of poisoning.
The laws of the Bavarians, Burgundians, Frisians, Thuringians, and
Visigoths contain practically nothing of medico-legal interest. The Lex
Alamannorum has numerous provisions relating to wounds, and expressly
provides that the gravity of the injury shall be determined by a
physician.[25]

During the period of about a thousand years, intervening between
the Justinian and Caroline (_vide infra_) codes, the advancement of
medicine and jurisprudence suffered almost complete arrest. The guilt
or innocence of an accused person was determined rather by his own
confession under torture, or by “the judgment of God” as shown by
ordeal or by judicial combat, than by testimony either expert or of
fact.

Even during the night of the Middle Ages, instances are recorded in
which the opinions of physicians were sought to determine questions of
fact in judicial proceedings.

In the duchy of Normandy, in 1207-45, the laws provided for the
examination of those claiming to be sick (to evade military service or
appeal to judicial duel), of persons killed, and of women.[26]

In a decretal of Innocent III., in 1209, the question whether a certain
wound was mortal was determined by physicians.[27]

There is extant in the statutes of the city of Bologna, under date of
1249, an entry to the effect that Hugo di Lucca had been assigned the
duty, when called upon by the podesta, and after having been sworn, to
furnish a true report in legal cases.[28]

In the kingdom of Jerusalem (_ca._ 1250) a person claiming exemption
from trial by battle because of sickness or of wounds was visited by
a physician (_fisicien au miége_) and a surgeon (_sérorgien_), who
examined him and made oath as to his condition.[29]

Sworn surgeons to the king are also mentioned in letters patent of
Philippe le Hardi in 1278, of Philippe le Bel in 1311, and of Jean II.
in 1352.[30] That of Philippe le Bel refers to Jean Pitardi as one of
“his well-beloved sworn surgeons in his Chastelet of Paris,” whose
functions are partly indicated by the extracts from the registers given
below.

The registers of the Châtelet at Paris from 1389 to 1392 record several
instances in which medical aid was rendered in judicial proceedings.
Under date of March 22d, 1389-90, “Maître Jehan Le Conte, sworn surgeon
to the king our sire,” reports to Maître Jehan Truquam, lieutenant to
the provost, that “upon that day in the morning one Rotisseur had gone
from life unto death in consequence of the wounds which he had received
on the Monday evening preceding.”[31] Under date of July 22d, 1390,
is an account of the examination of one Jehan le Porchier, accused of
intent to poison the king (Charles VI.), in which there is reference
to a very early instance of toxicological expert evidence. In the
wallet of the accused certain herbs were found. The account proceeds:
“Richart de Bules, herbalist, was summoned, to him the above-mentioned
herbs were shown, and he was commanded that he should examine them and
consider well and duly, reporting the truth of what he should find.
The said Richart, after having examined them with great diligence,
reported that in the box in which these herbs were he had found six
leaves, namely: one leaf of _jacia nigra_, and one of round plantain,
called in Latin _plantago minor_, and four of sow-thistle (_lasseron_),
called in Latin _rosti poterugni_, and says that the leaf of _jatria
nigra_ is poisonous, but that in the others there is no poison known
to the deponent.”[32] On August 12th, 1390, “Jehan Le Conte and Jehan
Le Grant, sworn surgeons of our sire the king,” are present at the
torture of a prisoner, but for what purpose does not appear. In another
case the same Jehan Le Conte testified that a wound in the head of a
deceased person was made with an axe.[33] At a later period in Italy,
the infliction of “the question” took place under medical supervision.
Zacchias devotes a chapter, _De Tormentis et Pœnis_,[34] to the
consideration of the different methods of torture, the degrees of pain
and danger attending each, and the conditions of age, sex, and health
which render its application inadmissible.[35]

During this period, as indeed from the earliest times, the practice
of medicine was regulated by law. Thus a law of King Roger of Sicily
(1129-54) punished those who practised medicine without authority with
imprisonment and confiscation of goods; and an edict of Frederick II.
(1215-46) imposed like penalties upon those who presumed to practise
except after graduation at the school of Salernum.[36]

Medico-legal science was formed in the middle of the sixteenth century
by a simultaneous awakening of jurists and physicians to the importance
of the subject.

It was in Germany that expert medical testimony was first legally
recognized. In 1507, George, Bishop of Bamberg, proclaimed a criminal
code in his domains. This was subsequently adopted by other German
states, and finally was the model upon which the _Caroline Code_, the
first general criminal code applying to the whole empire, was framed
and proclaimed at the Diet of Ratisbon in 1532.[37]

These codes, particularly the Caroline, distinctly provide for
utilizing the testimony of physicians. Wounds are to be examined by
surgeons who are “to be used as witnesses;”[38] and in case of death
one or more surgeons are to “examine the dead body carefully before
burial.”[39] They also contain provisions for the examination of women
in cases of contested delivery, or suspected infanticide;[40] for the
regulation of the sale of poisons;[41] for the detection and punishment
of malpractice;[42] and for examination into the mental condition in
cases of suicide and of crime.[43]

An early work on the practice of criminal law, based on the Caroline
Code, was published by the Flemish jurist, Josse de Damhouder, in 1554.
It contains a chapter treating of the lethality of wounds, which should
be determined by expert physicians and surgeons,[44] and describes
the course which is to be pursued in the judicial examination of dead
bodies. This is probably the earliest printed book (other than the laws
themselves) containing reference to medico-legal examinations,[45] and
antedates the writings of physicians upon the subject.

Although it was only in 1670 that the Ordinances of Louis XIV. gave
to France a uniform criminal code, medico-legal reports were made by
physicians and surgeons to the courts more than a century before.
Indeed, the earliest medico-legal work written by a physician[46] is
the 27th book of the Œuvres d’Ambroise Paré, first printed in 1575,
in which he directs the forms in which judicial reports shall be
made in various medico-legal cases.[47] During the remainder of the
sixteenth century France produced but three treatises on medico-legal
subjects.[48] One of these, written by the jurist A. Hotman, distinctly
mentions the employment of physicians to determine questions of fact.

In Italy works on medical jurisprudence were published at the close of
the sixteenth and beginning of the seventeenth century. The earliest
of these was a chapter of Codronchius, treating of the “method of
testifying in medical cases,” in 1597.[49] At about the same time, but
certainly later, appeared the work of Fortunatus Fidelis, to whom the
honor of being the first writer on medical jurisprudence is given by
many.[50]

The great work of Paulus Zacchias, physician to Pope Innocent X., was
first printed at Rome, 1621-35. This medico-legal classic contains
in the first two volumes the “_Quæstiones_” and in the third the
decisions of the Roman Rota. It treats of every branch of medico-legal
science, and discusses physiological questions of legal interest,
besides dealing with questions such as the infliction of torture and
miracles.[51]

Although the “Quæstiones Medico-legales” of Zacchias was the first
systematic work upon medical jurisprudence, his countrymen in
succeeding centuries have contributed but little to this science. It is
only during the latter part of the present century that Italians have
again become prominent in medico-legal literature.

In France legal medicine progressed but little from the time of Paré to
the latter part of the eighteenth century. Several treatises appeared,
being chiefly upon legitimacy and kindred subjects,[52] with a few
treating of reports, signs of death, etc.[53]

Toward the end of the eighteenth century the labors of Louis, Petit,
Chaussier, and Fodéré elevated legal medicine to the rank of a science.
The investigations of Louis (Ant. L.) were numerous and important in
this as in other subjects,[54] and the “_causes célébres_” contain
reports of many trials in which he threw light upon doubtful medical
questions.[55] Antoine Petit, a contemporary of Louis, contributed an
extensive work on the duration of pregnancy as affecting legitimacy.[56]

Somewhat later Fr. B. Chaussier, between 1785 and 1828, published
at Dijon a number of treatises on infanticide, viability, surgical
malpractice, etc.[57] Fodéré, a Savoyard, was the first to publish a
systematic treatise on medical jurisprudence in France, which was first
printed in 1798 and in a much enlarged form in 1813.[58] This last
edition is an exhaustive treatise upon all branches of legal medicine
and public hygiene, and won for its author the appointment as Professor
of Forensic Medicine in the University of Strassburg.

At about the same period appeared the works of Mahon[59] and of
Belloc,[60] both of which went through three editions in ten years, and
those of Biessy.[61]

The most industrious and original of French professors of legal
medicine was Orfila. A native of Minorca, he graduated in medicine
at Paris in 1811, and devoting himself to chemical and toxicological
investigations, published the first edition of his “Traité des
Poisons” in 1814. This work, which may be regarded as the foundation
of experimental and forensic toxicology, went through five editions
to 1852, and was translated into several foreign languages. The first
edition of his “Leçons de Médecine légale” appeared in 1821, and the
fourth in 1848. Besides these Orfila published a work on the treatment
of asphyxia and a great number of papers on medico-legal subjects,
principally in the _Annales d’Hygiène_, of which he was one of the
founders with Andral, Esquirol, Leuret, and Devergie. Orfila occupied
the chair of chemistry and medical jurisprudence in the University
of Paris for upward of thirty years, and was employed as expert in
innumerable cases before the courts.

Contemporaneous with Orfila, and almost as prominent, was Devergie, the
first edition of whose “Médecine légale,” in three volumes, appeared in
1836, and the third in 1852.

In 1820 the first edition of the Manual of Briand and Brosson was
published. This work, the tenth edition of which was published in 1879,
is the first in which a jurist was associated with a physician in the
authorship,[62] and is one of five of which one of the authors is a
lawyer.[63]

Special treatises on the medico-legal relations of insanity were
published by Georget (1821), Falvet (1828), Esquirol (1838), and Marc
(1840), and on midwifery by Capuron (1821).

Tardieu, Professor of Legal Medicine in the University of Paris
(1861-79), published a most important series of monographs on hygienic
and medico-legal subjects,[64] besides many papers, principally in the
_Annales d’Hygiène_, _etc._, and testified before the courts in many
“_causes célébres_.”

The first work of medico-legal interest to appear in Germany was the
“Medicus-Politicus” of Rodericus à Castro, a Portuguese Jew living in
Hamburg, printed in 1614, which deals principally with medical ethics
and the relations of physicians, but contains chapters on simulated
diseases, poisoning, wounds, drowning, and virginity.[65]

It was only toward the end of the seventeenth century that the
subject was scientifically treated, and during the latter part of
the seventeenth century and the beginning of the eighteenth great
progress was made in the development of forensic medicine in Germany.
Johannes Bohn, one of the originators of the experimental method of
investigation in physiological chemistry and physics, at the University
of Leipzig, was also one of the earliest German contributors to the
literature of legal medicine. Besides smaller works he published two
noteworthy treatises: in 1689 a work on the examination of wounds
and the distinction between ante-mortem and post-mortem wounds, and
between death by injury, strangulation, and drowning.[66] In 1704 a
work giving rules for the conduct of physicians in attending the sick
and in giving evidence in the courts.[67] At about the same period M.
B. Valentini, professor in the University of Giessen, published three
important works, containing collections of medico-legal cases, and of
the opinions and decisions of previous writers.[68] Another extensive
collection of cases and decisions was published in 1706 by J. F.
Zittmann, from a MS. left by Professor C. J. Lange, of the University
of Leipzig;[69] and still another by J. S. Hasenest[70] appeared in
1755.

