The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Medicinal Plants of the Philippines, by 
T. H. Pardo de Tavera

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Medicinal Plants of the Philippines

Author: T. H. Pardo de Tavera

Translator: Jerome Beers Thomas

Release Date: August 22, 2008 [EBook #26393]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



The flora of the Archipelago is known to-day through the works of
Fathers Blanco, Llanos, Fernandez del Villar and Naves, and of the
engineers Jordano, the brothers Vidal and Soler and others who have
brought such honor to Spanish science, preparing the way for the study
of the therapeutic and industrial applications of that wonderfully rich
plant life with which our islands have been endowed. Their works help
us to recognize the plants whose medicinal virtues are herein described
and it is to them I owe the botanical descriptions in this treatise.

Father Blanco, in describing certain plants, mentions their medicinal
uses in the Philippines, but his descriptions are few and very
deficient as one would expect in a work of the scope of his Flora. A
Jesuit of some reputation, Father Clain, published in Manila in 1712
a book entitled "Remedios fáciles para diferentes enfermedades?" in
which he speaks of the medicinal virtues of some of the indigenous
plants, almost the same ones that appear in another work, a frank
and pleasing little treatise written by Father Santa Maria. Father
Mercado is the only one who has written a special treatise on the
subject and his manuscript remained unedited until the Augustinian
Fathers of Manila published it in the last edition of Father Blanco's
"Flora"; but neither this work nor those of Clain or Santa Maria are
useful to a physician, nor are they as accurately written as works
of a scientific character should be. From time to time superficial
articles have appeared in the Manila papers regarding the virtues of
some plant or other and these books and articles comprise the whole
literature on the subject up to this time.

Some physicians regard with small favor the therapeutic application of
plants by the Filipino "herb-doctors" (curanderos) as being entirely
empirical. This disparagement is unjustified because in all the
most rational and scientific remedies that we make use of, the first
step towards the final development of their relative position among
remedies is due to empiricism which is founded on daily experience,
on observation of results obtained in specific cases, facts that
are handed down from father to son for generations. The scientific
explanation is lacking, but those first ideas frequently owing their
origin to chance, or, perhaps, to superstition, have often been based
upon the observation of facts which, although fortuitous, are none
the less positive.

Many of the plants mentioned in this book are official in the
Pharmacopoeia of India and we see no reason why their use should be
proscribed in the Philippines. Filipino physicians not only can but
should employ many indigenous plants in their therapeutics; in many
instances they would find them more useful than the exotics, which
are not always fresh and are commonly reduced in strength by long
keeping or damaged by some circumstance of voyage or climate. The
price is another argument in favor of the use of native drugs. If
the pharmacists would prepare extracts and keep on hand the crude
drugs most in demand the public would gain a great advantage and the
druggists be well repaid for their labor. Physicians and pharmacists
will surely understand these advantages and when finally one considers
that the patients generally prefer to be treated with native plants,
I feel justified in the hope that their use will spread rapidly in
the Philippines.

To employ therapeutically the drugs described in this work is not
to experiment "in anima vilis," as some would have us believe. To
experiment is to employ unknown remedies of unknown virtues and
properties.

In this treatise I am not attempting to fix the indications for this
or that product, but simply make known the diseases in which the
Filipinos and the natives of other countries employ the products. Any
physician has a perfect right to prescribe these drugs, as have also
the "curanderos" and even the laity, with this difference, however,
that the physician is capable of observing results and guiding
himself by the physiologic action of the drugs. His knowledge of
the physiologic and anatomo-pathologic problems of the human body,
will enable the physician to make scientific inferences that would
be hidden from the common "curandero."

As neither the Manila nor the provincial physicians keep these
medicinal plants in stock, with the exception of those that are
official in the European and American pharmacopoeias, it will be
necessary for the physician who wishes to use them, to busy himself
with seeking them and laying in a sufficient stock to serve him when
the opportunity presents itself. It is necessary to preserve them by
drying and this is best done by exposing them several days to the fresh
air in a dry place--for example, the corridors of the house--being
careful not to expose them to the rays of the sun, in which latter
event the fleshy and juicy plants which do not desiccate rapidly,
putrefy or ferment.

A convenient way to get them is to visit the Binondo Square where there
has been market for native drugs from time immemorial. The gardeners
from the neighboring towns, especially those from Pasay and Singalon,
regularly offer the plants for sale and will undertake to supply you
with any that may not be on hand. Inasmuch as the common names of the
plants lead to many mistakes and much confusion, it is indispensable to
acquaint one's self with the description of the plant and be sure that
the actual product conforms in all respects to the description. For
this purpose it is well to obtain flowering specimens, and bearing
this fact in mind I have been careful to indicate the flowering
season of each plant. By making excursions to the towns of San Mateo
and Angono I have obtained an abundance of whatever I sought and
at the same time have learned by talking with the mountaineers and
"curanderos," what uses they make of their plants. The "curanderos"
know a great deal concerning these uses, but become very reticent
as soon as they are questioned about them. Whether it is dread of
ridicule or selfishness or fear that silences them, the fact remains
that it is no easy matter to glean any useful facts from them. And
yet by tact and friendliness one may elicit much more information
from them than first impressions would lead one to hope.

Leaves should be gathered when fully developed, rejecting the old,
dried and worm-eaten ones.

The best time to gather bark is one month before the period of
inflorescence, when it is rich in sap. The flowers are best gathered
when about half expanded. The fruit is gathered green or ripe according
to the active principle sought. The seeds should always be mature.

Not all parts of the plant are equally provided with the active
principle which may be localized in the root or the flower; or distinct
principles may exist in different parts of the same plant. Therefore
the part indicated, and only that part, should be employed.

In the root the active substance usually resides in the bark, sometimes
in the parenchyma that envelopes the woody tissue and rarely in the
woody tissue itself, as, for example, in "rhubarb" and "pareira brava."

The stem bark is also a frequent seat of the active principle, of
which the outer portion contains the greater amount, according to
the valuable experiments of Howard.

Some plants owe their therapeutic importance to their wood, others to
their leaves or flowers, and regarding the localization of the active
principle in these parts we have nothing especial to indicate. The
fruit, however, may have a pericarp consisting of mucilage, starch,
sugar and gum, etc., while the seeds contain fatty matter, fixed or
essential oils or alkaloids, as is the case with coffee and cacao. In
view of these facts, we repeat that it is indispensable to use that
part of each plant which I have indicated as applicable to a determined
case or condition.

I earnestly hope that the physicians and pharmacists practising in
the Philippines may undertake investigations and experiments regarding
the therapeutic properties of the plants of my native land, and that
my endeavors may have acted as a stimulus or inspiration to the loyal
and earnest study of the subjects that are now awakening such interest,
not only in Europe and America, but in India and Japan.

I should be pleased to receive notes, plants or reports of researches
from any one interested in the subject matter of this book, and I
shall consider it a pleasure, as well as a duty, to devote my forces,
small as they may be, to aiding any one who may do me the honor to
claim my assistance.


