The Project Gutenberg eBook, Medieval Medicine, by James J. (James Joseph)
Walsh


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Medieval Medicine


Author: James J. (James Joseph) Walsh



Release Date: July 25, 2013  [eBook #43300]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1




After Aëtius came Alexander of Tralles, from another of these towns of
Asia Minor that we would consider insignificant, sometimes termed
Trallianus for this reason. He must be reputed one of the great
independent thinkers in medicine whose writings have deservedly attracted
attention not only in his own time, but long afterwards in the Renaissance
period, and with whose works everyone who cares to know anything about the
development of medical history must be familiar. One detail of his life
has always seemed to me to correct a whole series of misapprehensions with
regard to the earlier Middle Ages. Alexander was one of five brothers, all
of whose names have come down to us through nearly 1,500 years because of
what they accomplished at the great Capital of the East. The eldest of
them was Anthemios, the architect of the great Church of Santa Sophia. A
second brother was Methrodoros, a distinguished grammarian and teacher at
Constantinople. A third brother was a prominent jurist in the Imperial
Courts of the capital; while a fourth brother, Dioscoros, was, like
Alexander, a physician of repute, but remained in his birthplace Tralles,
and acquired a substantial practice there.

There is sometimes the feeling that at this time in the world's history,
the end of the sixth and the beginning of the seventh century, men had but
little initiative, and above all very little power of achievement in the
intellectual order. Anyone who knows Santa Sophia in Constantinople,
however, will recognize at once that the architect who conceived and
superintended the construction of that great edifice was a genius of a
high order, not lacking in initiative, but on the contrary possessed of a
wonderful power of original accomplishment. No greater constructive work,
considering all the circumstances, has perhaps ever been successfully
planned and executed. It would scarcely be expected that the brother of
the man who conceived and finished Santa Sophia would, if he set out to
write a textbook of medicine, make an egregious failure of it. Surely his
work would not be all unworthy of his brother's reputation, and the family
genius should lift him up to important accomplishment. This is literally
what we find true with regard to Alexander. After years of travel which
led him into Italy, Gaul, Spain, and Africa, he settled down at Rome, and
practised medicine successfully until a very old age, and probably
lectured there, for some of his books are in the form of lectures.

Fortunately for us, he committed his knowledge and his experience to
writing, which has come down to us.

A third of these greater writers on medicine in the early Middle Ages was
Paul of Ægina--Æginetus as he is sometimes known. There has been some
question as to his date in history, but as he quotes Alexander of Tralles
there seems to be no doubt now that his career must be placed in the first
half of the seventh century. We shall see more of him, as also of his
great contemporaries and predecessors of the early Middle Ages, Aëtios and
Alexander of Tralles, in a subsequent chapter. Besides these men who were
known for their writings, a series of less known Christian physicians
were praised by their contemporaries for their knowledge of medicine.
Among them are particularly to be noted certain members of an Arabian
family with the title Bachtischua, a name which is derived from the Arabic
words _Bocht Jesu_--that is, servant of Jesus--who, having studied among
the Greek Christians in the cities of Asia Minor, were called to the Court
of Haroun al-Raschid and introduced Greek medicine to the Mohammedans. I
have pointed out in my volume "Old-Time Makers of Medicine"[1] that "it
was their teaching which aroused Moslem scholars from the apathy that
characterized the attitude of the Arabian people towards science at the
beginning of Mohammedanism."

After this preliminary period of early medieval medical development, the
next important phase of medicine and surgery in the Middle Ages developed
in the southern part of Italy at Salerno. Here came the real awakening
from that inattention to intellectual interests which characterized Italy
after the invasion of the northern barbarians. The reason for the early
Renaissance in this neighbourhood is not far to seek. In the older times
Sicily had been a Greek colony, and the southern portion of Italy had been
settled by Greeks and came to be known as Magna Græcia. The Greek
language continued to be spoken in many parts even during the earlier
medieval centuries, and Greek never became the utterly unknown tongue it
was in Northern Italy. With the turning of attention to education in the
later Middle Ages, the Southern Italians were brought almost at once in
contact with Greek sources, and the earlier Renaissance began. With this
in mind, it is comparatively easy to understand the efflorescence of
culture in Southern Italy, and the development of the important University
of Salerno and its great accomplishment, particularly in scientific
matters, though all this came almost entirely as a consequence of the
opportunity for Greek influence to have its effect there.

It is sometimes said that Arabian influence meant much for the development
of Salerno, and that it was because the southern part of the Italian
peninsula was necessarily rather closely in touch with Arabian culture
that an early awakening took place down there. The Mohammedans occupied so
many of the islands of the Mediterranean, as well as Spain, that their
influence was felt deeply all along its shore, and hence the first
university of Europe in modern times came into existence in this part of
the world. Montpellier is sometimes, though not so often, said to have had
the same factor in its early development. Undoubtedly there was some
Arabian influence in the foundation of Salerno. The oldest traditions of
the University show this rather clearly. This Arabian influence, however,
has been greatly exaggerated by some modern historical writers. Led by the
thought that Christianity was opposed to culture, and above all to
science, they were quite willing to suggest any other influences than
Christian as the source of so important a movement in the history of human
progress as Salerno proved to be. The main influence at Salerno, however,
was Greek, and the proof of this is, as insisted by Gurlt in his "History
of Surgery," that the great surgeons of Salerno do not refer to Arabian
sources, but to Greek authors, and their books do not show traces of
Arabian influences, but on the contrary have many Græcisms in them.

Salerno represents an especially important chapter in the history of
Medieval Medicine. As we shall see, the teachers at the great medical
school there set themselves in strenuous opposition to the Arabian
tendency to polypharmacy, by which the Oriental mind had seriously hurt
medicine, and what is still more to the credit of these Salernitan
teachers, they developed surgery far beyond anything that the Arabs had
attempted. Indeed, surgery in the later centuries of Arabian influence
had been distinctly neglected, but enjoyed a great revival at Salerno.
Besides, the Salernitan physicians used all the natural methods of cure,
air, water, exercise, and diet, very successfully. If any other proof were
needed that Arabian influence was not prominent at Salerno, surely it
would be found in the fact that women physicians enjoyed so many
privileges there. This is so entirely opposed to Mohammedan ways as to be
quite convincing as a demonstration of the absence of Arabian influence.

From Salerno, the tradition of medicine and surgery spread to Bologna
early in the thirteenth century, and thence to the other universities of
Italy and to France. Montpellier represented an independent focus of
modern progress in medicine, partly due to close relationship with the
Moors in Spain and the Greek influences they carried with them from Asia
Minor, but not a little of it consequent upon the remnants of the older
Greek culture, still not entirely dead even in the thirteenth century,
because Marseilles, not far away, had been a Greek colony originally, and
still retained living Greek influence, and wherever Greek got a chance to
exercise its stimulant incentive modern scientific medicine began to
develop.

France owed most of her development in medicine and surgery at the end of
the Middle Ages to the stream of influence that flowed out of Italian
universities. Such men as Lanfranc, who was an Italian born but exiled;
Mondeville, who studied in Italy; and Guy de Chauliac, who has so freely
acknowledged his obligation to Italian teachers, were the capital sources
of medical and surgical teaching in France in the later Middle Ages.

It is thus easy to see how the two periods of historical import in
medicine at the beginning and end of the Middle Ages may be placed in
their intimate relation to Greek influences. At the beginning, Greek
medicine was not yet dead in Asia Minor, and it influenced the Arabs. When
the revival came, it made itself first felt in the portions of Southern
Italy and Southern France where Greek influence had been strongest and
still persisted. Fortunately for us, the great Renaissance printers and
scholars, themselves touched by the Greek spirit of their time, put the
books of the writers of these two periods into enduring printed form, and
in more recent years many reprints of them have been issued. These volumes
make it possible for us to understand just how thoroughly these colleagues
of the Middle Ages faced their problems, and solved them with a practical
genius that deserves the immortality that their works have been given.

The history of medicine and surgery during the Middle Ages has been
greatly obscured by the assumption that at this time scientific medicine
and surgery could scarcely have developed because men were lacking in the
true spirit of science. The distinction between modern and medieval
education is often said to be that the old-time universities sought to
increase knowledge by deduction, while the modern universities depend on
induction. Inductive science is often said to be the invention of the
Renaissance period, and to have had practically no existence during the
Middle Ages. The medieval scholars are commonly declared to have preferred
to appeal to authority, while modern investigators turn to experience.
Respect for authority is often said to have gone so far in the Middle Ages
that no one ventured practically to assert anything unless he could find
some authority for it. On the other hand, if there was any acknowledged
authority, say Aristotle or Galen, men so hesitated to contradict him that
they usually followed one another like sheep, quoting their favourite
author and swearing by the authority of their chosen master. Indeed, many
modern writers have not hesitated to express the greatest possible wonder
that the men of the Middle Ages did not think more for themselves, and
above all did not trust to their own observation, rather than constantly
rest under the shadow of authority.

Above all, it is often asked why there was no nature study in the Middle
Ages--that is, why men did not look around them and see the beauties and
the wonders of the world and of nature, and becoming interested in them,
endeavour to learn as much as possible about them. Anyone who thinks that
there was no nature study in the Middle Ages, however, is quite ignorant
of the books of the Middle Ages. Dante, for instance, is full of the
knowledge of nature. What he knows about the ants, and the bees, and many
other insects; about the flowers, and the birds, and the habits of
animals; about the phosphorescence at sea and the cloud effects, and
nearly everything else in the world of nature around him, adds greatly to
the interest of his poems. He uses all these details of information as
figures in his "Divine Comedy," not in order to display his erudition, but
to bring home his meaning with striking concreteness by the metaphors
which he employs. There is probably no poet in the modern time who knows
more about the science of his time than Dante, or uses it to better
advantage.

It is sometimes thought that the medieval scholars did not consider that
experience and observation were of any value in the search for truth, and
that therefore there could have been no development of science. In an
article on "Science at the Medieval Universities"[2] I made a series of
quotations from the two great scientific scholars of the thirteenth
century, Albertus Magnus and Roger Bacon, with regard to the question of
the relative value of authority and observation in all that relates to
physical science. Stronger expressions in commendation of observation and
experiment as the only real sources of knowledge in such matters could
scarcely be found in any modern scientist. In Albert's tenth book of his
"Summa," in which he catalogues and describes all the trees, plants, and
herbs known in his time, he declares: "All that is here set down is the
result of our own experience, or has been borrowed from authors whom we
know to have written what their personal experience has confirmed; for in
these matters experience alone can be of certainty." In his impressive
Latin phrase, _experimentum solum certificat in talibus_. With regard to
the study of nature in general he was quite emphatic. He was a theologian
as well as a scientist, yet in his treatise on "The Heavens and the
Earth," he declared that: "In studying nature we have not to inquire how
God the Creator may, as He freely wills, use His creatures to work
miracles, and thereby show forth His power. We have rather to inquire
what nature with its immanent causes can naturally bring to pass."

Roger Bacon, the recent celebration of whose seven hundredth anniversary
has made him ever so much better known than before, furnishes a number of
quotations on this subject. One of them is so strong that it will serve
our purpose completely. In praising the work done by Petrus, one of his
disciples whom we have come to know as Peregrinus, Bacon could scarcely
say enough in praise of the thoroughly scientific temper, in our fullest
sense of the term, of Peregrinus's mind. Peregrinus wrote a letter on
magnetism, which is really a monograph on the subject, and it is mainly
with regard to this that Roger Bacon has words of praise. He says: "I know
of only one person who deserves praise for his work in experimental
philosophy, for he does not care for the discourses of men and their wordy
warfare, but quietly and diligently pursues the works of wisdom.
Therefore, what others grope after blindly, as bats in the evening
twilight, this man contemplates in their brilliancy, _because he is a
master of experiment_. Hence, he knows all of natural science, whether
pertaining to medicine and alchemy, or to matters celestial or
terrestrial. He has worked diligently in the smelting of ores, as also in
the working of minerals; he is thoroughly acquainted with all sorts of
arms and implements used in military service and in hunting, besides which
he is skilled in agriculture and in the measurement of lands. It is
impossible to write a useful or correct treatise in experimental
philosophy without mentioning this man's name. Moreover, he pursues
knowledge for its own sake; for if he wished to obtain royal favour, he
could easily find sovereigns who would honour and enrich him."

Roger Bacon actually wanted the Pope to forbid the study of Aristotle
because his works were leading men astray from the true study of
science--his authority being looked upon as so great that men did not
think for themselves, but accepted his assertions. Smaller men are always
prone to act thus at any period in the world's history, and we undoubtedly
in our time have a very large number who do not think for themselves, but
swear on the word of some master or other, and very seldom so adequate a
master as Aristotle.

Bacon insisted that the four great grounds of human ignorance are: "First,
trust in inadequate authority; second, that force of custom which leads
men to accept without properly questioning what has been accepted before
their time; third, the placing of confidence in the assertions of the
inexperienced; and fourth, the hiding of one's own ignorance behind the
parade of superficial knowledge, so that we are afraid to say, 'I do not
know.'" Prof. Henry Morley suggested that: "No part of that ground has yet
been cut away from beneath the feet of students, although six centuries
have passed. We still make sheepwalks of second, third, and fourth, and
fifth hand references to authority; still we are the slaves of habit,
still we are found following too frequently the untaught crowd, still we
flinch from the righteous and wholesome phrase, 'I do not know,' and
acquiesce actively in the opinion of others that we know what we appear to
know."

It used to be the custom to make little of the medieval scientists because
of their reverence for Aristotle. Generations who knew little about
Aristotle, especially those of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
were inclined to despise preceding generations who had thought so much of
him. We have come to know more about Aristotle in our own time, however,
and as a consequence have learned to appreciate better medieval respect
for him. Very probably at the present moment there would be almost
unanimous agreement of scholars in the opinion that Aristotle's was the
greatest mind humanity has ever had. This is true not only because of his
profound intellectual penetration, but above all because of the
comprehensiveness of his intelligence. For depth and breadth of mental
view on a multiplicity of subjects, Aristotle has never been excelled and
has but very few rivals. The admiration of the Middle Ages for him,
instead of being derogatory in any way to the judgment of the men of the
time, or indicating any lack of critical appreciation, rather furnishes
good reasons for high estimation of both these intellectual modes of the
medieval mind. Proper appreciation of what is best is a much more
difficult task than condemnation of what is less worthy of regard. It is
the difference between constructive and destructive criticism. Medieval
appreciation of Aristotle, then, constitutes rather a good reason for
admiration of them than for depreciation of their critical faculty; and
yet they never carried respect and reverence to unthinking worship, much
less slavish adoration. Albertus Magnus, for instance, said: "Whoever
believes that Aristotle was a God must also believe that he never erred;
but if we believe that Aristotle was a man, then doubtless he was liable
to err just as we are." We have a number of direct contradictions of
Aristotle from Albert. A well-known one is that with regard to Aristotle's
assertion that lunar rainbows appeared only twice in fifty years. Albert
declared that he himself had seen two in a single year.

Galen, after Aristotle, was the author oftenest quoted in the Middle
Ages, and most revered. Anyone who wants to understand this medieval
reverence needs only to read Galen. There has probably never been a
greater clinical observer in all the world than this Greek from Pergamos,
whose works were destined to have so much influence for a millennium and a
half after his time. How well he deserved this prestige only a careful
study of his writings will reveal. It is simply marvellous what he had
seen and writes about. Anatomy, physiology, pathological anatomy,
diagnosis, therapeutics--all these were magnificently developed under his
hands, and he has left a record of accurate and detailed observation.
There are many absurdities easily to be seen in his writings now, but no
one has yet written on medicine in any large way who has avoided
absurdities, nor can anyone hope to, until we know much more of the
medical sciences than at present. The therapeutics of any generation is
always absurd to the second succeeding generation, it has been said. Those
in the modern time who know their Galen best have almost as much
admiration for him, in spite of all our advance in the knowledge of
medicine, as the medieval people had. No wonder, seeing the depth and
breadth of his knowledge, that he was thought so much of, and that men
hesitated to contravene anything that he said.

Even in the authorities to which they turned with so much confidence, the
medieval physicians are admirable. If man must depend on authority, then
he could not have better than they had. As with regard to this, so in all
other matters relating to the Middle Ages, the ordinarily accepted notions
prove to have been founded on ignorance of actual details, and
misconceptions as to the true significance of their point of view. To have
contempt give way to admiration, we need only to know the realities even
in such meagre details as can be given in a short manual of this kind. The
thousand years of the Middle Ages are now seen to have been full of
interesting and successful efforts in every mode of human activity, and
medicine and surgery shared in this to the full.




CHAPTER II

EARLY MEDIEVAL MEDICINE


There are two distinct periods in the history of Medieval Medicine. The
first concerns the early centuries, from the sixth to the ninth, and is
occupied mainly with the contributions to medicine made by those who were
still in touch with the old Greek writers; while the second represents the
early Renaissance, when the knowledge of the Greek writers was gradually
filtering back again, sometimes through the uncertain channel of the
Arabic. Both periods contain contributions to medicine that are well
worthy of consideration, and nearly always the writings that have been
preserved for us demonstrate the fact that men were thinking for
themselves as well as studying the Greek writers, and were making
observations and garnering significant personal experience. The later
Middle Ages particularly present material in this regard of far greater
interest than was presumed to exist until comparatively recent historical
studies were completed.

The real history of medicine in the Middle Ages--that is, of scientific
medicine--is eclipsed by the story of popular medicine. So much has been
said of the medical superstitions, many of which were rather striking,
that comparatively little space has been left for the serious medical
science and practice of the time, which contain many extremely interesting
details. It is true that after the Crusades mummy was a favourite
pharmacon, sometimes even in the hands of regular physicians; and _Usnea_,
the moss from the skulls of the bodies of criminals that had been hanged
and exposed in chains, was declared by many to be a sovereign remedy for
many different ills; but it must not be forgotten that both of these
substances continued to be used long after the medieval period, mummy even
down to the middle of the eighteenth century, and Usnea almost as late.
Indeed, it is probable that the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
present many more absurdities in therapeutics than do the later centuries
of the Middle Ages. In this, as in so many other regards, the modern use
of the adjective medieval has been symbolic of ignorance of the time
rather than representative of realities in history.

Popular medicine is always ridiculous, though its dicta are often accepted
by supposedly educated people. This has always been true, however, and was
never more true than in our own time, when the vagaries of medical faddism
are so strikingly illustrated, and immense sums of money spent every year
in the advertising of proprietary remedies, whose virtues are often sadly
exaggerated, and whose tendency to work harm rather than good is
thoroughly appreciated by all who know anything about medicine. The
therapeutics of supposedly scientific medicine are often dubious enough. A
distinguished French professor of physiology quoted, not long since, with
approval, that characteristic French expression: "The therapeutics of any
generation are always absurd to the second succeeding generation." When we
look back on the abuse of calomel and venesection a century ago, and of
the coal-tar derivatives a generation ago, and the overweening confidence
in serums and vaccines almost in our own day, it is easy to understand
that this law is still true. We can only hope that our generation will not
be judged seven centuries from now by the remedies that were accepted for
a time, and then proved to be either utterly ineffectual or even perhaps
harmful to the patients to whom they were given.

When we turn our attention away from this popular pseudo-history of
Medieval Medicine, which has unfortunately led so many even well-informed
persons into entirely wrong notions with regard to medical progress during
an important period, we find much that is of enduring interest. The first
documents that we have in the genuine history of Medieval Medicine, after
the references to the organizations of Christian hospitals at Rome and
Asia Minor in the fourth and fifth centuries (see chapter Medieval
Hospitals), are to be found in the directions provided in the rules of the
religious orders for the care of the ailing. St. Benedict (480-543), the
founder of the monks of the West, was particularly insistent on the
thorough performance of this duty. The rule he wrote to guide his
religious is famous in history as a great constitution of democracy, and
none of its provisions are more significant than those which relate to the
care of the health of members of the community.

One of the rules of St. Benedict required the Abbot to provide in the
monastery an infirmary for the ailing, and to organize particular care of
them as a special Christian duty. The wording of the rule in this regard
is very emphatic. "The care of the sick is to be placed above and before
every other duty, as if, indeed, Christ were being directly served in
waiting on them. It must be the peculiar care of the Abbot that they
suffer from no negligence. The Infirmarian must be thoroughly reliable,
known for his piety and diligence and solicitude for his charge." The last
words of the rule are characteristic of Benedict's appreciation of
cleanliness as a religious duty, though doubtless also the curative effect
of water was in mind. "Let baths be provided for the sick as often as they
need them." As to what the religious infirmarians knew of medicine, at
least as regards the sources of their knowledge and the authors they were
supposed to have read, we have more definite information from the next
historical document, that concerning medical matters in the religious
foundation of Cassiodorus.

Cassiodorus (468-560), who had been the prime minister of the Ostrogoth
Emperors, when he resigned his dignities and established his monastery at
Scillace in Calabria, was influenced deeply by St. Benedict, and was
visited by the saint not long after the foundation.

His rule was founded on that of the Benedictines. Like that, it insisted
especially on the care of the sick, and the necessity for the deep study
of medicine on the part of those who cared for them. Cassiodorus laid down
the law in this regard as follows: "I insist, brothers, that those who
treat the health of the body of the brethren who have come into the sacred
places from the world should fulfil their duties with exemplary piety. Let
them be sad with others' suffering, sorrowful over others' dangers,
sympathetic to the grief of those whom they have to care for, and always
ready zealously to help others' misfortunes. Let them serve with sincere
study to help those who are ailing as becomes their knowledge of medicine,
and let them look for their reward from Him who can compensate temporal
work by eternal wages. Learn, therefore, the nature of herbs, and study
diligently the way to combine their various species for human health; but
do not place your entire hope on herbs, nor seek to restore health only by
human counsels. Since medicine has been created by God, and since it is He
who gives back health and restores life, turn to Him. Remember, do all
that you do in word or deed in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to God the Father through Him. And if you are not capable of reading
Greek, read above all the translations of the Herbarium of Dioscorides,
which describes with surprising exactness the herbs of the field. After
this, read translations of Hippocrates and Galen, especially the
Therapeutics, and Aurelius Celsus' 'De Medicina,' and Hippocrates' 'De
Herbis et Curis,' and divers other books written on the art of medicine,
which by God's help I have been able to provide for you in my library."

The monasteries are thus seen to have been in touch with Greek medicine
from the earliest medieval time. The other important historical documents
relating to Medieval Medicine which we possess concern the work of the
men born and brought up in Asia Minor, for whom the Greeks were so close
as to be living influences. Aëtius, Alexander of Tralles, and Paul of
Ægina have each written a series of important chapters on medical
subjects, full of interest because the writers knew their Greek classic
medicine, and were themselves making important observations. Aëtius, for
instance, had a good idea of diphtheria. He speaks of it in connection
with other throat manifestations under the heading of "crusty and
pestilent ulcers of the tonsils." He divides the anginas generally into
four kinds. The first consists of inflammation of the fauces with the
classic symptoms; the second presents no inflammation of the mouth nor of
the fauces, but is complicated by a sense of suffocation--apparently our
neurotic croup. The third consists of external and internal inflammation
of the mouth and throat, extending towards the chin. The fourth is an
affection rather of the neck, due to an inflammation of the
vertebræ--retropharyngeal abscess--which may be followed by luxation, and
is complicated by great difficulty of respiration. All of these have as a
common symptom difficulty of swallowing. This is greater in one variety
than in another at different times. In certain affections he remarks that
even "drinks when taken are returned through the nose."

Aëtius declares quite positively that all the tumours of the neck region,
with the exception of scirrhus, are easily cured, yielding either to
surgery or to remedies. The exception is noteworthy. He evidently saw a
good many of the functional disturbances and the enlargements of the
thyroid gland, which are often so variable in character as apparently to
be quite amenable to treatment, and which have actually been "cured" in
the history of medicine by all sorts of things from the touch of the
hangman's rope to the wrapping of the shed skin of the snake around the
neck. A few cervical tumours were beyond resource. Aëtius suggests the
connection between hypertrophy of the clitoris and certain exaggerated
manifestations of the sexual instinct, as well as the development of
vicious sexual habits.

It requires only a little study of this early medieval author to
understand why Cornelius, at the time of the Renaissance, was ready to
declare: "Believe me, that whoever is deeply desirous of studying things
medical, if he would have the whole of Galen abbreviated and the whole of
Orbiasius extended, and the whole of Paulus (of Ægina) amplified; if he
would have all the special remedies of the old physicians, as well in
pharmacy as in surgery, boiled down to a summa for all affections, he will
find it in Aëtius."

Alexander of Tralles was, as we have said, the brother of the architect of
Santa Sophia of Constantinople, and his writings on medical and surgical
subjects are worthy of such a relationship. His principal work is a
treatise on the "Pathology and Therapeutics of Internal Diseases" in
twelve books, the first eleven books of which were evidently material
gathered for lectures or teaching purposes. He treats of cough as a
symptom due to hot or cold, dry or wet, dyscrasias. Opium preparations
judiciously used he thought the best remedies, though he recommended also
the breathing in of steam impregnated with various ethereal resins.

He outlines a very interesting because thoroughly modern treatment of
consumption. He recommends an abundance of milk with a hearty nutritious
diet, as digestible as possible. A good auxiliary to this treatment in his
opinion was change of air, a sea voyage, and a stay at a watering-place.
Ass's and mare's milk are much better for these patients than cow's and
goat's milk. We realize now that there is not enough difference in the
composition of these various milks to make their special prescription of
physical importance, but it is probable that the suggestive influence of
the taking of an unusual milk had a very favourable effect upon patients,
and this effect was renewed with every drink taken, so that much good was
ultimately accomplished. For hæmoptysis, especially when it was acute and
due, as Alexander felt, to the rupture of a bloodvessel in the lungs, he
recommended the opening of a vein at the elbow or the ankle--in order to
divert the blood from the place of rupture to the healthy parts of the
circulation. He insisted, however, that the patients must in addition
rest, as well as take acid and astringent drinks, while cold compresses
should be placed upon the chest [our ice-bags], and that they should take
only a liquid diet, at most lukewarm, or, better, if agreeable to them,
cold. When the bleeding stopped, he declared a milk cure [blood-maker]
very useful for the restoration of these patients to their former
strength.

