The Project Gutenberg EBook of Triumphs and Wonders of the 19th Century, by 
James P. Boyd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Triumphs and Wonders of the 19th Century
       The True Mirror of a Phenomenal Era

Author: James P. Boyd

Release Date: August 20, 2017 [EBook #55390]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

After a lapse of more than two thousand years from the experiment of
Thales, Dr. Gilbert, physician to Queen Elizabeth (A. D. 1533–1603),
took up the study of amber and various other substances which, when
subjected to friction, acquired the property of first, attracting
and then repelling light bodies brought near them. He published his
observations in a little book called “De Magnete,” in the year A. D.
1600, and thus became the first author of a work upon electricity. In
this unique and initial work upon simple electrical effects, the author
added greatly to the number of substances that could be electrified by
friction, and succeeded in establishing the different degrees of force
with which they could be made to attract or repel light bodies brought
near them.

Fortunately for electrical science, and for that matter all sciences,
about this time the influence of Lord Bacon’s Inductive Philosophy
began to be felt by investigators and scientific men. Before that,
the causes of natural phenomena had not been backed up by repeated
experiments amounting to practical proofs, but had been accounted
for, if at all, by sheer guesses or whimsical reasons. Bacon’s method
introduced hard, cold, constant experiment as the only sure means of
finding out exactly the causes of natural phenomena; and not only this,
but the necessity of series upon series of experiments, each based
upon the results of the former, and so continuing, link by link, till,
from a comparison of the whole, some general principle or truth could
be drawn that applied to all. This _inductive_ method of scientific
research gave great impetus to the study of every branch of science,
and especially to the unfolding of infallible and practical laws
governing the phenomena of nature.

For very many years electrical experiments followed the lines laid
down by Dr. Gilbert; that is, the finding of substances that could be
excited or electrified by friction. By and by such substances came to
be called _electrics_, and it became a part of the crude electrical
science of the time to compute the force with which these electrics,
when excited, attracted or repelled other substances near them.
Among the ablest of these investigators were Robert Boyle, author of
“Experiments on the Origin of Electricity,” Sir Isaac Newton, Otto
von Guericke, and Francis Hawksbee, the last of whom communicated his
experiments to the English Royal Society in 1705. Otto von Guericke
used a hard roll of sulphur as an electric. He caused it to revolve
rapidly while he rubbed or excited it with his hand. Newton and
Hawksbee used a revolving glass globe in the same way, and thus became
the parents of the modern and better equipped electrical machine used
for school purposes.

The next step in electrical discovery, and one which marks an epoch in
the history of the science, was made by Stephen Gray, of England, in
1729. To him is due the credit of finding out that electricity from an
excited glass cylinder could be conducted away from it to objects at a
remote distance. Though he used only a packthread as a conductor, he
thus carried electricity to a distance of several hundred feet, and his
novel discovery opened up what, for the time, was a brilliant series
of experiments in England and throughout France and Germany. Out of
these experiments came the knowledge that some substances were natural
conductors of electricity, while others were non-conductors; and that
the non-conductors were the very substances—glass, resin, sulphur,
etc.—which were then in popular use as electrics. Here was laid the
foundation of those after-discoveries which led to the selection of
copper, iron, and other metals as the natural and therefore best
conductors of electricity, and glass, etc., as the best insulators or
non-conductors.

Up to this time an excited electric, such as a glass cylinder or
wheel, had furnished the only source whence electricity had been drawn
for purposes of experiment. But now another great step forward was
taken by the momentous discovery that electricity, as furnished by
the excited but quickly exhausted electric, could be bottled up, as
it were, and so accumulated and preserved in large quantities, to be
drawn upon when needed for experiment. It is not known who made this
important discovery; but by common consent the storage apparatus,
which was to play so conspicuous a part in after-investigations, was
named the _Leyden Jar_ or _Phial_, from the city of Leyden in Holland.
It consisted of a simple glass jar lined inside and out with tinfoil
to within an inch or two of the top, the tinfoil of the inside being
connected by a conductor passing up through the stopper of the jar
to a metallic knob on top. This jar could be charged or filled with
electricity from a common electric, and it had the power of retaining
the charge till the knob on top was touched by the knuckle, or some
unelectrified substance, when a spark ensued, and the jar was said to
be discharged. By conductors attached to the knob, guns were fired off
at a distance by means of the spark, and it is said that Dr. Benjamin
Franklin ignited a glass of brandy at the house of a friend by means
of a wire attached to a Leyden jar and stretched the full width of the
Schuylkill River at Philadelphia.

[Illustration: LEYDEN JAR.]

At this stage in the history of eighteenth century electricity there
enters a character whose experiments in electricity, and whose
writings upon the subject, not only brought him great renown at home
and abroad, but perhaps did more to systematize the science and turn
it to practical account than those of any contemporary. This was the
celebrated Dr. Benjamin Franklin, of Philadelphia, Pa. He showed to the
world that electricity was not created by friction upon an electric,
but that it was merely gathered there, when friction was applied, from
surrounding nature; and in proof of his theory he invaded the clouds
with a kite during a thunder-storm, and brought down electricity
therefrom by means of the kite-string as a conductor. The key he hung
on the string became charged with the electric fluid, and on being
touched by an unelectrified body, emitted sparks and produced all the
effects commonly witnessed in the discharge of the Leyden jar.

Franklin further established the difference between positive and
negative electricity, and showed that the spark phenomenon on the
discharge of the Leyden jar was due to the fact that the inside tinfoil
was positively electrified and the outside tinfoil negatively. When
the inside tinfoil was suddenly drawn upon by a conductor, the spark
was simply the result of an effort upon the part of the two kinds
of electricity to maintain an equilibrium. By similar reasoning he
accounted for the phenomenon of lightning in the clouds, and by easy
steps invented the lightning-rod, as a means of breaking the force
of the descending bolt, and carrying the dangerous fluid safely to
the ground. Here we have not only a practical result growing out
of electrical experiments, but we witness the dawn of an era when
electricity was to be turned to profitable commercial account. The
lightning-rod man has been abroad in the world ever since the days of
Franklin.

Thus far, then, electrical science, if science it could yet be called,
had gotten on at the dawn of the nineteenth century. No electricity
was really known but that produced by friction upon glass, or some
other convenient electric. Hence it was called _frictional_ electricity
by some, and _static_ electricity by others, because it was regarded
as electricity in a state of rest. Though a thing fitted for curious
experiment, and a constant invitation to scientific research, it had
no use whatever in the arts. An excited electric could furnish but a
trivial and temporary supply of electricity. It exhausted itself in the
exhibition of a single spark.


II. THE NEW NINETEENTH CENTURY ELECTRICITY.

By a happy accident in 1790, Galvani, of Bologna, Italy, while
experimenting upon a frog, discovered that he could produce alternate
motion between its nerves and muscles through the agency of a fluid
generated by certain dissimilar metals when brought close together.
Though this mysterious fluid came to be known as the galvanic fluid,
and though galvanism was made to perpetuate his name, it was not until
1800 that Volta, another Italian, showed to the scientific world that
really a new electricity had been found.

[Illustration: FRANKLIN INSTITUTE, PHILADELPHIA.

(From photo furnished by Institute.)]

Volta constructed what became known as the galvanic pile, but more
largely since as the voltaic pile, which he found would generate
electricity strongly and continuously. He used in its construction
the dissimilar metals silver and zinc, cut into disks, and piled
alternately one upon the other, but separated by pieces of cloth
moistened with salt water. This simple generator of electricity was the
forerunner of the more powerful batteries of the present day, and which
are still popularly known as voltaic cells or batteries.

But the importance of Volta’s discovery did not lay more in the
construction of his electrical generator than in the great scientific
fact that chemistry now became linked indissolubly with electricity
and electrical effects. The two novel and charming sciences, hitherto
separate, were henceforth to coöperate in those majestic revelations
and magnificent possibilities which so signally distinguish the
nineteenth century. By means of greatly improved voltaic cells or
batteries, that is, by jars containing acid in which were suspended
dissimilar metals, electricity could be produced readily and in
somewhat continuous current. By increasing the number of these cells
or jars or batteries, and connecting them with conductors, the current
could be made stronger and more effective. In contradistinction to the
old frictional or static electricity, the new became known as chemical
or current electricity.

As was to have been expected, Volta’s invention and discovery excited
the whole domain of electrical science to new investigation, and
brought in their train a host of wonderful results, growing more and
more practical each year, and pointing the way more and more clearly to
the commercial value of electricity as a familiar, inexhaustible, and
irresistible power. Thus, in 1801, Nicholson showed that an electric
current from a voltaic pile would, when passed through salt water,
decompose the water and resolve it into its two original gases, oxygen
and hydrogen. In 1807, Sir Humphrey Davy, carrying electricity further
into the domain of chemistry, showed, by means of the electric current,
that various metallic substances embraced in the earth’s crust, and
before his time supposed to be elementary, were really dissoluble and
easily resolved into their component parts, whether solids, or gases,
or both. Two years later, in 1809, he made the equally momentous
discovery of something which was to prove a veritable _sit lux_, “Let
there be light,” for the nineteenth century, and illuminate it beyond
all others. Though it had been known almost from the date of the
first voltaic pile that, when the ends of its two conducting wires
were brought close together, a spark was seen to leap in a curved or
arc line from one wire to the other, which phenomenon was known as
the voltaic arc, it remained for Davy to exhibit this arc in all the
beauty of a brilliant light by using two charcoal (carbon) sticks or
electrodes, instead of the wires, at the point of close approach. Here
was the first principle of the after-evolved arc light to be found
by the end of the century in every large city, and to prove such a
source of comfort and safety for their millions of inhabitants. This
principle was simply that a stream of electricity pouring along a
conducting wire will, when interrupted by a substance such as carbon
(charcoal), which is a slow conductor, throw off a bright light at the
point of interruption. The phenomenon has been very aptly likened to a
running stream of water in whose bed a stone has been placed. The stone
obstructs the flow of water. The water remonstrates by an angry ripple
and excited roar. In Davy’s experiment with the pieces of charcoal,
both became intensely hot while the electricity was making its
brilliant arc leap from one to the other, and would, of course, soon
be consumed. He, therefore, in showing the principle of a permanent
luminant, failed to demonstrate its practical possibilities. These last
were not to be attained till the nineteenth century was well along, and
only after very numerous and very baffling attempts.

Between 1810 and 1830, many important laws governing electrical
phenomena were discovered, which tended greatly to render the
science more exact, and to give it commercial direction. Oersted, of
Denmark, discovered a means of measuring the strength and direction
of an electric current. Ampère, of France, discovered the identity
of electricity and what had before been called galvanism. Ritchie,
of England, made the first machine by which a continuous motion was
produced by means of the attractions and repulsions between fixed
magnets and electro-magnets. This machine was an early suggestion of
the dynamo and motor of the coming years of the century. It meant that
electricity was a source of power, as well as of other phenomenal
things.

In speaking of the electro-magnet in connection with Ritchie’s machine,
it is proper to say that the electro-magnet was probably discovered
between 1825 and 1830, but precisely by whom is not known. It differs
from the natural magnet, or the permanent steel horseshoe magnet, and
consists simply of a round piece of soft iron, called a core, around
which are wrapped several coils of fine wire. When an electric current
is made to pass through this wrapping of wire, called the helix, the
iron core becomes magnetized, and has all the power of a permanent
magnet. But as soon as the electric current ceases, the magnetic
power of the core is lost. Hence it is called an electro-magnet, or a
temporary magnet, to distinguish it from a permanent magnet.

[Illustration: INDUCTION COIL.]

While the discovery of the electro-magnet was very important in the
respect that it afforded great magnetic power by the use of a limited
or economic galvanic force, or, in other words, by the use of smaller
and fewer Voltaic batteries, it was not until Faraday began his
splendid series of electrical discoveries, in 1831, that a new and
exhaustless wellspring of electricity was found to lay at the door
of science. Faraday’s prime discovery was that of the induction of
electric currents, or, in other words, of manufacturing electricity
directly from magnetism. He began his experiments with what became
known as an induction coil, which, though then crude in his hands, is
the same in principle to-day. It consists of an iron core wrapped
with two coils of insulated wire. One coil is of very lengthy, thin
wire, and is called the secondary coil. The other is of short, thick
wire, and is called the primary. When a magnetic current is passed
through the primary coil, with frequent makes and breaks, it induces
an alternating current of very high tension in the secondary coil,
thus powerfully increasing its effects. In Faraday’s further study of
electric induction, he showed that when a conductor carrying a current
was brought near to a second conductor it induced or set up a current
in this second. So magnets were found to have a similar effect upon one
another.

