The Project Gutenberg eBook, Shell-Shock and Other Neuropsychiatric
Problems, by Elmer Ernest Southard


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Shell-Shock and Other Neuropsychiatric Problems
       Presented in Five Hundred and Eighty-nine Case Histories from the War Literature, 1914-1918


Author: Elmer Ernest Southard



Release Date: May 19, 2016  [eBook #52105]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8



Some of the French writers on the neurology of the war, as illustrated
in the records collected by Dr. Southard, have brought to our attention
distinctions which they draw between _états commotionnels_ and _états
émotionnels_--happy terms, and yet not sufficient in their invention
or in the explanations which accompany them, fully to satisfy the
requirements of the facts presented. These writers seem to think of
the commotional states as denoting some real disease or condition of
the brain, and yet one which is really curable and reversible. They
explicitly tell us, however, that these commotions fall short of
being _lésionnel_. After all, is this not somewhat obscure? Is it not
something of a return to the period of “railway spine” when one of the
comparisons sometimes made was that the injury suffered by the nervous
tissues produced in them a state comparable to that of a magnet
which had been subjected to a severe blow? At any rate, in commotion
thus discussed the nervous structures are supposed to sustain some
real injury of a physiochemical character, whereas in the emotional
states the neurones are, as Southard puts it, affected somewhat after
the manner of normal emotional functioning, except perhaps that they
are called upon to deliver an excessive stream of impulses. The
latter would be classed among the psychopathic, the former among the
physiopathic affections, and yet the distinction between the two is not
always quite clear.

In not a few instances of Shell-shock--although these are not numerous,
so far as records have been obtained--actual structural lesions have
been recorded even in cases in which no direct external injury of a
material kind was experienced as a result of the explosion of shells.
In others the evidences of external injury were relatively unimportant.
Various lesions, in some cases recognizable even by the naked eye, were
present. Mott, for example, found not only minute hemorrhages, but
in one instance a bulbar extravasation of moderate massiveness, the
patient not showing external signs of injury. Cases are also recorded
of hematomyelia; others with edematous or necrotic areas in the cord;
and still others with lesions of the ependyma or even with splitting of
the spinal canal, reminding one of the classical experiments of Duret
on cerebral and cerebrospinal traumatisms.

It has been argued that too much stress should not be laid on a few
cases of this sort--but are they as few as they seem to be? The fact
is that necropsical opportunities are not often afforded. May not such
scattered lesions often be present without resulting in death or even
in long continued disturbance? There is no essential reason why minute
hemorrhages into the brain and spinal cord, and especially into their
membranes, may not undergo rapid absorption or even remain unchanged
for some time without dire results.

One of the reported cases in which lung splitting occurred from severe
concussion without external injury is not without interest in this
connection, reminding one, as the commentator says, of those cases of
severe concussion in which the interior of a building is injured while
the exterior escapes. In the same connection also the cited experiments
of Mairet and Durante on rabbits are not without instructiveness.
As a result of explosives set off close to these animals, pulmonary
apoplexy, spinal cord and root hemorrhages, and extravasations,
perivascular and ependymal, and into the cortical and bulbar gray were
found. Russca obtained direct and _contrecoup_ brain lesions, etc., in
a similar way.

Here and there throughout the book will be found references to
symptoms and syndromes which will have a particular interest for the
reader--soldier’s heart, trench foot, congealed hand, tics, tremors,
convulsions, sensory areas variously mapped, and forms of local
tetanus, the last being distinctly to be differentiated from pithiatic
contractures and those due to organic lesions of the nervous system.
Cases of an affection described by Souques as camptocormia, from Greek
words meaning to bend the trunk, were shown to the Neurological Society
of Paris in 1914 and later, the main features of this affection being
pronounced incurvation forward of the trunk from the dorsolumbar
region, with extreme abduction and outward rotation of the lower limbs,
pain in the back, and difficult and tremulous walking. In some of these
cases, organic lesions of the trunkal tissues were present, but in
addition psychic elements played a not unimportant part, and the cases
were restored to health by a combination of physical measures with
psychotherapy, enforced by electrical applications.

The part of this book given over to the discussion of treatment will
doubtless to some prove the most interesting section. The presentation
of the subject of therapeutics is in some degree a discussion also of
diagnosis and prognosis; and so it happens in various parts of the
volume that the particular subject under consideration is more or less
a reaffirmation or anticipation of remarks under other headings.

Similar results are brought about by various therapeutic procedures.
Nonne, Myers, and a few others bring hypnosis into the foreground,
although non-hypnotic suggestion plays a larger rôle by far.

Miracle cures are wrought through many pages. Mutism, deafness and
blindness, palsies, contractures, and tics disappear at times as if by
magic under various forms of suggestion. Ether or chloroform narcosis
drives out the malady at the moment when it reveals its true nature.
Verbal suggestion has many adjuvants and collaborators--electricity,
sometimes severely administered, lumbar puncture, injections of
stovaine into the cerebrospinal fluid, injections of saline solution,
colored lights, vibrations, active mechanotherapy, hydrotherapy, hot
air baths and blasts, massage, etc. Painful and punitive measures have
their place--one is inclined to think a less valuable place than is
given them by some of the recorders. In some instances the element of
suggestion, while doubtless present, is overshadowed by the material
methods employed. Persuasion and actual physical improvement are in
these cases highly important. Reëducation is not infrequently in
evidence. The patient in one way or another is taught how to do things
which he had lost the way of doing.

It is interesting to American neurologists to note how frequently
in the reports, especially of French observers, the “Weir Mitchell
treatment” was the method employed, including isolation, the faradic
current, massage, and Swedish movements, hydrotherapy, dietetic
measures, reëducative processes, and powerful suggestion variously
exhibited, especially through the mastery of the physician over
the patient. It is rather striking that few records of Freudian
psychoanalytic therapy are presented.

When all is said, however, counter-suggestion and persuasion, in
whatever guise made use of, were not always sufficient and this not
only in the clearly organic cases, but in those which are ranked under
the head of reflex nervous disorders. In these the long-continued use
of physical agencies was found necessary to supplement the purely
psychic procedures, these facts sometimes giving rise in the Paris
Society of Neurology and elsewhere to animated discussion as to the
real nature of the cases. The pithiatic features of the case at times
disappear, but leave behind much to be explained and more to be
accomplished. The cures wrought are not always permanent and in some
cases post-bellum experiences may be required to prove the real value
of the measures advocated. The reader must study well the detailed
records in order to arrive at just conclusions; nevertheless, the
tremendous efficacy of suggestion and persuasion stands out in many of
the recitals.

Perhaps the author may permit the introducer a little liberty of
comment. His non-English interpellations, especially Latin and French,
may be regarded by some as overdone or perhaps pedantic, but are rather
piquant, giving zest to the text. _Diagnosis per exclusionem in ordine_
is sonorous and has a scholarly flavor, but does not prevent the reader
who lives beyond the faubourgs of Boston from understanding that the
author is speaking of an ancient and well-tried method of differential
diagnosis. _Passim_ may be more impressive or thought-fixing than
its English translation, but this to the reader will simply prove
a matter of individual opinion. _Psychopathia martialis_ is not
only mouth-filling like _Senegambia_ or _Mesopotamia_, but really
has a claim to appreciation through its evident applicability. It
is agreeable to note that the book seems nowhere to indicate that
_psychopathia sexualis_ and _psychopathia martialis_ are convertible
terms.

The bibliography of the volume challenges admiration because of its
magnitude and thoroughness and is largely to be credited, as the author
indicates, to the energy and efficiency of Sergeant Norman Fenton, who
did the work in connection with the Neuropsychiatric Training School
at Boston, resorting first-hand to the Boston Medical Library and the
Library of the New York Academy of Medicine. After Sergeant Fenton
joined the American Expeditionary Force, Dr. Southard greatly increased
the value of the bibliography by his personal efforts.

This bibliography covers not only the 589 case histories of the book,
but it goes beyond this, especially in the presentation of references
for 1917, 1918, and even 1919. Owing to the time when our country
entered the war, American references are, in the main, of later date
than the case histories. They will be found none the less of value to
the student of neuropsychiatric problems.

The references in the bibliography number in all more than two
thousand, distributed so far as nationalities are concerned about
as given below, although some mistakes may have crept into this
enumeration for various reasons, like the publication of the same
articles in the journals of different countries. The list of references
includes French, 895; British (English and Colonial), 396; Italian,
77; Russian, 100; American, 253; Spanish, 5; Dutch, 5; Scandinavian,
5; and Austrian and German, 476. It will be seen, therefore, that the
bibliography covers in number nearly four times the collected case
studies, most of these records being from reports made during the first
three years of the war. The author has wisely made an effort to bring
the bibliographic work up to and partially including 1919.

The manner in which the French neurologists and alienists continued
their work during the strenuous days of the terrible conflict is
worthy of all praise. The labors of the Society of Neurology of Paris
never flagged, its contributions in current medical journals having
become familiar to neurologists who have followed closely the trend of
medical events during the war. Cases and subjects were also frequently
presented and discussed at the neurological centers connected with the
French and allied armies in France.

It may be almost invidious to specify names, the work done by many
was of so much interest and value. Dejerine in the early days of the
war, before his untimely sickness and death, contributed his part.
Marie from the beginning to the end of the conflict continued to
make the neurological world his debtor. The name of Babinski stands
out in striking relief. Other names frequently appearing among the
French contributors are those of Froment, Clovis Vincent, Roussy
and Lhermitte, Léri, Guillain, Souques, Laignel-Lavastine, Courbon,
Grasset, Claude, Barre, Benisty, Foix, Chavigny, Charpentier, Meige,
Thomas, and Sollier.

For a work of this character not only as complete a bibliography as
possible, but a thorough index is absolutely necessary, and this has
been supplied. The author has not made the index too full, but with
enough cross-references to enable those in all lines of medical work
interested to cull out the cases and comments which most concern them.

My prologue finished, I step aside for the play and the player, with
the recommendation to the reader that he give close heed to the
performance--to the recital of the cases, the comments thereon, and the
general discussion of subjects--knowing that such attention will be
fully rewarded, for in this wonderful collection of Dr. Southard is to
be seen an epitome of war neurology not elsewhere to be found.

                                                      CHARLES K. MILLS.

